40 Physiology, Homeostasis, and Temperature RegulationThe camel is called the "ship of the desert" because it can carry a large load across a hot desert without having to drink for days. Under similar conditions, a human sweats profusely to keep body temperature from rising, and can lose from 1 to 4 liters of water an hour. Without water, a human can become dangerously dehydrated in an hour. The dehydration causes the circulatory system and the thermoregulatory systems to fail, and body temperature begins to rise. As body temperature rises above 40 C, a person becomes dizzy and disoriented and gradually becomes delirious, loses consciousness, suffers brain damage, and dies. A person without water can die in the desert in only a few hours. Why are camels better able to deal with desert conditions than we are? Several adaptations are important, but one of the most significant is that the camel's body temperature rises and falls  more than ours does. Whereas humans try to keep their body temperatures close to 37(C by sweating, the camel allows its body temperature to rise to about 41(C over the course of the day. The camel's insulating coat of fur helps to slow its uptake of heat, but by tolerating the rise in its body temperature, it does not squander its body water for evaporative cooling.When the air temperature falls at night, the camel passively unloads its accumulated heat to the environment. But now the situation reverses, and the camel allows its body temperature to fall. A human starts to produce heat by shivering when body temperature falls below about 36(C, but the camel's body temperature can fall below 34(C without stimulating shivering. The heat a camel stores in its body by allowing its body temperature to rise 7(C between sunup and sundown would require the evaporation of at least 5 liters of water to dissipate if the camel tried to maintain a constant body temperature. The camel has other adaptations, too. When it does reach water, it can drink about a third of its body weight to replace its losses! The camel is an example of an animal that can live in an extreme environment. Physiology is the study of how organisms work-the study of the functions of all of the parts and processes of living systems. By studying the physiology of animals, we can understand how many species manage to live in extreme environments. By studying the special adaptations of such species, we frequently gain new information about how the human body works. Animal physiology is the focus of the next twelve chapters of this book. Each chapter will present a system of structures that provides essential functions for the animal body. A structure might be a single cell, or it might be a population of similar cells that make up a tissue, or it might be a collection of different kinds of tissues that make up an organ. Two or more interacting organs constitute an organ system that serves one or more physiological functions. Organs and organ systems function to maintain the various physical and chemical aspects of an animal's internal environment at optimal levels.In this chapter we set the stage for our study of animal physiology by presenting an overview of how cells are organized into tissues, tissues into organs, and organs into organ systems with different physiological functions. We discuss general principles of how organ systems are controlled and regulated to achieve constancy in the internal environment. Most of this chapter deals with one feature of the internal environment: temperature. We will see how temperature influences living systems, what adaptations animals have for dealing with temperature challenges, and finally, how mammals regulate body temperature. 40.1 Homeostasis: Maintaining the Internal EnvironmentSingle-celled organisms meet all their needs by direct exchanges with the external environment. Even the cells of some small, simple multicellular animals meet their needs in this way. Such animals are common in the sea. Seawater contains nutrients and salts, and provides a relatively unchanging physical environment. Most cells of a sponge or a jellyfish are in direct contact with seawater, or are close enough that they can receive nutrients and eliminate wastes without specialized organs to transport nutrients and wastes around their bodies. This lifestyle is quite limiting, however. No part of the animal's body can be more than a few cell layers thick, every cell must be able to take care of all its own needs, and the animal is limited to environments that provide for all of its cellular needs. The evolution of an internal environment, distinct from the external environment, made complex multicellular animals possible. The internal environment consists of extracellular fluids that bathe every cell of the body, supplying nutrients and receiving wastes. Its physical and chemical conditions can be kept at levels favorable to the cells. The cells are thereby protected from the external environment, making it possible for an animal to occupy habitats that would not support its cells if they were exposed to it directly. In complex multicellular organisms, it became possible for cells to become specialized for tasks that could contribute to maintaining specific aspects of the internal environment. Some cells became organized into tissues specialized to maintain the salt and water balance of the internal environment, others became specialized to provide nutrients, and still others to maintain appropriate levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Specialized tissues and organs form systems within the the internal environment, each providing something all the cells of an animal need.The composition of the internal environment is constantly being perturbed by the external environment and by the activities of cells themselves. The internal environment of a person in a desert, for example, will either increase in temperature or decrease in volume and change in composition because of water loss. Simultaneously, the activities of the person's cells will be taking nutrients from and contributing wastes to the internal environment. The activities of the specialized tissues and organs must continuously correct the physical and chemical composition of the internal environment so that it remains conducive to life. The maintenance of  constant conditions in the internal environment is called homeostasis. Homeostasis is an essential feature of complex animals. If an organ fails to function properly, homeostasis is compromised, and as a result, cells become damaged and die. The damaged cells are not just those of the organ that functions improperly, but the cells of other organs as well. Loss of homeostasis is a serious problem that makes itself worse. To avoid loss of homeostasis, the activities of organs must be controlled and regulated in response to changes in both the external and the internal environments. Control and regulation require information; hence the organ systems of information-the endocrine and nervous systems-must be included in our discussions of every physiological function. For that reason, we treat the endocrine and nervous systems early in this part of the book. Subsequent chapters deal with the systems responsible for controlling various aspects of the internal environment. Although each chapter will focus on different organs, those organs are all made of the same tissue types.What are these tissue types, and what are their general features? 40.2 Tissues, Organs, and Organ SystemsCells are the basic building blocks of multicellular animals. When cells with the same characteristics or specializations are grouped together, they form a tissue. There are four basic types of tissues-epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous-but there are variations on each basic type. An organ is usually made up of several different tissue types.40.2.1 Epithelial tissues cover the body and line organsEpithelial tissues are sheets of densely packed, tightly connected cells that cover inner and outer body surfaces. They line hollow organs of the body such as the gut, the lungs, the bladder, and the blood vessels. Some epithelial cells have secretory functions-for example, those that secrete milk, mucus, digestive enzymes, or sweat. Others have cilia and help substances move over surfaces or through tubes. Since epithelial cells create boundaries between the inside and the outside of the body and between body compartments, they frequently have absorptive and transport functions. Epithelial cells can also be receptors that provide information to the nervous system. Smell and taste receptors, for example, are epithelial cells that detect specific chemicals.An epithelial tissue can be classified according to its structure and the appearance of its cells: A simple epithelium is a single layer of cells, such as that lining the gut. A stratified epithelium consists of multiple layers of cells, as is the case with the skin. A pseudostratified epithelium really consists of a single layer of cells, but because the cells are of different lengths, they give the appearance of multiple layers.The shapes of the cells making up an epithelium can be squamous (flattened), cuboidal, or columnar. Most cuboidal and columnar epithelia are involved in transport or secretory functions and have an abundance of organelles such as mitochondria and Golgi apparatus. Squamous epithelia, such as the outer layer of the skin, have fewer organelles; they frequently serve structural functions and as permeability boundaries. Epithelial tissues have distinct inner and outer surfaces. The outer surface faces the air, as in the case of the skin and lungs, or a fluid-filled organ cavity, such as the lumen of the gut. These outer surfaces are made up of the apical ends of the epithelial cells, which may have cilia or may be highly folded to increase their surface area. The inner surface of an epithelium consists of the basal ends of the epithelial cells, which rest on an extracellular matrix called a basal lamina. The skin and the lining of the gut are examples of epithelial tissues that receive much wear and tear. Accordingly, cells in these tissues have a high rate of cell division to replace cells that die and are shed. Dandruff consists of discarded skin cells, and the well-known Pap smear test for cancer of the female reproductive tract is based on examination of shed epithelial cells.40.2.2 Connective tissues support and reinforce other tissuesIn contrast to the densely packed epithelial tissues, connective tissues consist of dispersed populations of cells embedded in an extracellular matrix that they secrete. The composition and properties of the matrix differ among types of connective tissues. An important component of the extracellular matrix is protein fibers secreted by the connective tissue cells. The dominant protein in the extracellular matrix is collagen, which is, in fact, the most abundant protein in the body (representing 25 percent of total body protein). Collagen fibers have high tensile strength. They give the dense connective tissue of skin, tendons, and ligaments resistance to stretch. Similarly, the collagen fibers of reticular connective tissue provide a netlike framework for organs, giving them shape and structural strength. Loose connective tissue fills spaces between organs and has a low density of collagen fibers.Another type of protein fiber in the extracellular matrix of connective tissues is the stretchable protein elastin. It can be stretched to several times its resting length and then recoil. Fibers composed of elastin are most abundant in elastic connective tissue, such as that in the walls of the lungs and the large arteries. Elastin fibers in the skin are responsible for its ability to snap back when stretched, and gradual loss of these fibers with age causes gradual loss of the resiliency of the skin. Proteoglycans are extracellular proteins that give connective tissues resistance to compression. Proteoglycans are abundant in the extracellular matrix of the connective tissues lining joints. Cartilage and bone are connective tissues that provide rigid structural support. In cartilage, a network of collagen fibers is embedded in a rather flexible matrix consisting of a protein-carbohydrate complex called chondroitin sulfate. The cells that form cartilage are called chondrocytes, and they exist in small cavities in the cartilage. Cartilage forms the entire skeletal system of sharks and rays, which are therefore called cartilaginous fishes. Cartilage forms the skeletons of the early developmental stages of more complex vertebrates, but it is gradually replaced by bone, a harder connective tissue. Adult vertebrates retain cartilage as the support for flexible structures such as external ears, noses, and the windpipe. The extracellular matrix in bone also contains many collagen fibers, but it is hardened by the deposition of the mineral calcium phosphate. We will discuss bone in greater detail in Chapter 44.Adipose tissue is a form of loose connective tissue that includes adipose cells, which form and store droplets of lipids. Adipose tissue is a major source of stored energy, but it also serves to cushion organs, and layers of adipose tissue under the skin can provide a barrier to heat loss. Blood is a connective tissue consisting of cells dispersed in an extensive extracellular matrix: the blood plasma. The blood plasma is much more liquid than the extracellular matrices of the other connective tissues, but it too contains an abundance of proteins. One of those proteins, fibrinogen, serves a structural function when it is stimulated to polymerize and form a blood clot. Many of the proteins and cellular elements of the blood were presented in Chapter 19, and blood will be discussed again in Chapter 49.40.2.3 Muscle tissues contractMuscle tissues consist of elongated cells that can contract and cause movement.. Muscle tissues are the most abundant tissues in the body, and they use most of the energy produced in the body. The contraction of muscle cells depends on intracellular protein filaments that can slide past each other. In Chapter 47, we will encounter three types of muscle tissues:- Skeletal muscle connects bones to bones and is responsible for the body movements that constitute behavior.- Smooth muscle is found in internal organs and is not under voluntary control; it performs functions such as moving food through the gut and constricting blood vessels.- Cardiac muscle makes up the mass of the heart and pumps the blood.40.2.4 Nervous tissues process informationThere are two basic cell types in nervous tissues: neurons and glial cells. Neurons, which are extremely diverse in size and form, generate electrochemical signals. Responding to specific types of stimuli, such as light, sound, pressure, or certain molecules, neurons generate sudden voltage changes across their plasma membranes. These nerve impulses can be conducted via long extensions of the neurons to other parts of the body, where they are communicated to other neurons, muscle cells, or secretory cells. Neurons are involved in controlling the activities of most organ systems to achieve homeostasis. Glial cells do not generate or conduct electric signals, but they provide a variety of supporting functions for neurons. There are more glial cells than neurons in our nervous systems. We will detail and illustrate the properties of nervous tissues in Chapters 44, 45, and 46.40.2.5 Organs consist of multiple tissuesA discrete structure that carries out a specific function in the body is called an organ. Examples are the stomach, the heart, the liver, or the kidney. Most organs include all four tissue types. The wall of the stomach is a good example. The inner surface of the stomach that contacts food is lined with a simple epithelium. Some of the epithelial cells secrete mucus, enzymes, or stomach acid. Beneath the epithelial lining is connective tissue. Within this connective tissue are nerves, glands (secretory epithelial cells), and blood vessels. Concentric layers of muscle tissue enable the stomach to contract to mix food with the digestive juices. A network of neurons between the muscle layers controls these movements and also partially controls the secretions of the stomach. Surrounding the stomach is a layer of connective tissue called the serosa. An individual organ is usually part of an organ system-a group of organs that function together. The stomach is part of the digestive system, which also includes the food tube (esophagus), the small and large intestines, the pancreas, which secretes digestive enzymes, and the liver, which secretes bile. The major organ systems of mammals are outlined in Table 40_1. 40.3 Physiological Regulation and HomeostasisHomeostasis depends on the ability to regulate the functions of the organs and organ systems to counteract influences that would change the physical or chemical composition of the internal environment. In this section we discuss the general properties of physiological regulatory systems, and then consider temperature regulation as a specific example.40.3.1 Set points and feedback information are required for regulationIn addition to control mechanisms, regulation requires information. You can regulate the speed of a car only if you know the speed at which you are traveling and the speed you wish to maintain. The desired speed is a set point, and the reading on your speedometer is feedback information. When the set point and the feedback are compared, any difference between them is an error signal. Error signals suggest corrective actions, which you make by using the accelerator or brake. Physiological regulation requires actions of cells, tissues, and organs, which are called effectors because they effect changes. Effectors are also referred to as controlled systems because their activities are controlled by commands coming from regulatory systems. Regulatory systems obtain, process, and integrate information and issue commands to the controlled systems. A fundamental way to analyze a regulatory system is to identify its source of feedback information. Negative feedback is the most common type of feedback information in regulatory systems. The word "negative" indicates that this feedback information causes the effectors to reduce or reverse the process or influence that created the signal. In our car analogy, the recognition that you are going too fast is negative feedback if it causes you to slow down.40.3.2 Thermostats regulate temperatureThe thermostat that is part of the heating-cooling system of a house is a regulatory system. It has upper and lower set points that you can adjust, and it receives feedback information from a sensor that measures room temperature. The circuitry of the thermostat converts differences between the set points and feedback information into signals that activate the controlled systems-the furnace and the air conditioner. When room temperature rises above the upper set point, the thermostat activates the air conditioner to reduce the temperature; when room temperature falls below that upper set point, the air conditioner is turned off. If temperature falls below the lower set point, the furnace is activated, raising room temperature. The mechanism that senses room temperature provides negative feedback that is used to regulate both the air conditioner and the furnace. Negative feedback is a stabilizing influence in physiological regulatory systems. It contributes to homeostasis by stimulating actions that return a variable to its set point.Is there any such thing as positive feedback in physiology? Although not as common as negative feedback, it does exist. Rather than returning a system to a set point, positive feedback amplifies a response. Examples of regulatory systems that use positive feedback are the responses that empty body cavities, such as urination, defecation, sneezing, and vomiting. Another example is sexual behavior, in which a little stimulation causes more behavior, which causes more stimulation, and so on. Feedforward information is another feature of regulatory systems. The function of feedforward information is to change the set point. Seeing a deer ahead on the road when you are driving is an example of feedforward information; this information takes precedence over the posted speed limit, and you change your set point to a slower speed. If you want the temperature of your house to be lower at night than during the day, you can add a clock to the thermostat to provide feedforward information about time of day. These principles of control and regulation help organize our thinking about physiological systems. Once we understand how an organ or an organ system works, we can then ask how is it regulated. As an example, we will discuss in detail the system that regulates body temperature. But first, why is it necessary to regulate body temperature? 40.4 Temperature and LifeOver the face of Earth, temperatures vary enormously, from the boiling hot springs of Yellowstone National Park to the interior of Antarctica, where the temperature can fall below -80_C. Because heat always moves from a warmer to a cooler object, any change in the temperature of the environment causes a change in the temperature of an organism in that environment-unless the organism does something to regulate its temperature. Living cells function over only a narrow range of temperatures. If cells cool to below 0_C, ice crystals damage their structures, possibly fatally. Some animals have adaptations such as antifreeze molecules in their blood that help them resist freezing; others have adaptations that enable them to survive freezing. Generally, however, cells must remain above 0_C to stay alive. The upper temperature limit is less than 45_C for most cells. Some specialized algae can grow in hot springs at 70_C, and some bacteria can live at near 100_C, but in general, proteins begin to denature and lose their functional properties as temperatures approach 45_C. Most cellular functions are limited to the range of temperatures between 0_C and 45_C, which are considered the thermal limits for life. A particular species, however, generally has much narrower limits. Let's examine the effects of temperature on living systems.40.4.1 Q10 is a measure of temperature sensitivityEven within the range 0_ to 45_C, temperature changes create problems for animals. Most physiological processes, like the biochemical reactions that constitute them, are temperature-sensitive, going faster at higher temperatures. The temperature sensitivity of a reaction or process can be described in terms of Q10, a quotient calculated by dividing the rate of a process or reaction at a certain temperature, RT, by the rate of that process or reaction at a temperature 10_C lower, RT - 10: Q10 = RT / RT - 10. Q10 can be measured for a simple enzymatic reaction or for a complex physiological process, such as the rate of oxygen consumption. If a reaction or process is not temperature-sensitive, it has a Q10 of 1. Most biological Q10 values are between 2 and 3, which means that reaction rates double or triple as temperature increases by 10_C. Changes in temperature can be particularly disruptive to an animal's functioning because all the component reactions in the animal do not have the same Q10. Individual reactions with different Q10's are linked together in complex networks that carry out physiological processes. Changes in temperature shift the rates of some reactions more than those of others, thus disrupting the balance and integration that the processes require. For homeostasis, organisms must be able to compensate for or prevent changes in temperature.40.4.2 An animal's sensitivity to temperature can changeThe body temperature of some animals is tightly coupled to the environmental temperature. Think of a fish in a temperate-zone pond. As the temperature of the pond changes from 4_C in midwinter to 24_C in midsummer, the body temperature of the fish does the same. We can bring the fish into the laboratory in the summer and measure its metabolic rate (the sum total of the energy turnover of its cells, often measured by O2 consumption). If we measure the metabolic rate at different water temperatures, we might plot our data and calculate a Q10 of 2. We predict from our graph that in winter, when the temperature is 4_C, the fish's metabolic rate will be only one-fourth of what it was in the summer. We then return the fish to its pond. When we bring the fish back to the laboratory in the winter and repeat the measurements, we find, as the blue line shows, that its metabolic rate at 4_C is not as low as we predicted; rather, it is almost the same as it was at 24_C in the summer. If we repeat the measurement over a range of temperatures, we find that the fish's metabolic rate is always higher than the rate we predicted from the measurement we took at the same temperature in the summer. This difference is due to acclimatization, the process of physiological and biochemical change that an animal undergoes in response to seasonal changes in climate. Seasonal acclimatization in the fish has produced metabolic compensation, which readjusts the biochemical machinery to counter the effects of temperature. What might account for such a change? the different optimal temperatures of enzymes. If the fish can express similar enzymes that operate at different optimal temperatures, it can compensate metabolically by catalyzing reactions with one set of enzymes in summer and another set in winter. The end result is that metabolic functions are much less sensitive to long-term changes in temperature than they are to short-term thermal fluctuations. 40.5 Maintaining Optimal Body TemperatureAnimals can be classified by how they respond to environmental temperatures. A homeotherm is an animal that maintains a constant body temperature. A poikilotherm is an animal whose body temperature changes when the temperature of its environment (the ambient temperature) changes. This system of classification says something about the biology of the animals, but it presents problems. Should a fish in the deep ocean, where the temperature changes very little, be called a homeotherm? Should a hibernating mammal that allows its body temperature to drop to nearly the temperature of its environment be called a poikilotherm? The problem posed by the hibernator has been solved by creating a third category: the heterotherm, an animal that regulates its body temperature at a constant level some of the time. Another set of terms classifies animals on the basis of the sources of heat that determine their body temperatures. Ectotherms depend largely on external sources of heat, such as solar radiation, to maintain their body temperatures above the environmental temperature. Endotherms can regulate their body temperatures by producing heat metabolically or by mobilizing active mechanisms of heat loss. Mammals and birds are endotherms; animals of all other species behave as ectotherms most of the time.40.5.1 Ectotherms and endotherms respond differently in metabolic chambersA small lizard is an example of an ectotherm. We can compare it with a mouse, which is an endotherm of the same body size. We can put each animal in a metabolic chamber and measure body temperatures and metabolic rates as we change the temperature of the chamber from 0_C to 35_C. The results obtained from the two species differ. The body temperature of the lizard equilibrates with that of the chamber, whereas the body temperature of the mouse remains at 37_C. The metabolic rate of the lizard decreases as the temperature decreases. In contrast, the mouse's metabolic rate increases as chamber temperature falls below about 27_C (notice that you must read the graph right to left to see this). The lizard apparently cannot regulate its body temperature or metabolism independently of environmental temperature. The mouse, however, regulates its body temperature by increasing its metabolic rate, which increases its production of body heat.40.5.2 Ectotherms and endotherms use behavior to regulate body temperatureWe can test our laboratory conclusion that the lizard cannot regulate its body temperature. To do this, we release the lizard in its desert habitat and measure its temperature as it goes about its normal behavior in this environment, where temperature can change 40_C in a few hours. Unlike what we observed in the metabolic chamber, the body temperature of the lizard is at times considerably different from the environmental temperature. At night, the temperature in the desert may drop close to freezing, but the temperature of the lizard remains stable at 16_C. No mystery here: The lizard spends the night in a burrow, where the soil temperature is a constant 16_C. Early in the morning, soon after sunrise, the lizard emerges from its burrow. The air temperature is still cool, but the lizard's body temperature rises above 30_C in less than 30 minutes. The lizard achieves this by basking on a rock with maximum exposure to the sun. As its skin absorbs solar radiation, its body temperature rises considerably above the air temperature. By altering its exposure to the sun, the lizard maintains its body temperature around 35_C all morning.By noon, the air temperature near the surface of the desert has risen to 50_C, but the lizard maintains its body temperature around 35_C by staying mostly in the shade and frequently in the branches of bushes, where there is a cooling breeze. As afternoon progresses, the air cools, and the lizard again spends more of its time in the sun and on hot rocks to maintain its body temperature around 35_C. The lizard returns to its burrow just before sunset, and its body temperature rapidly drops to 16_C. Our conclusion must be that the lizard can regulate its body temperature quite well by behavioral mechanisms rather than by internal metabolic mechanisms. In our laboratory experiment, the lizard in the chamber could not use its thermoregulatory behavior, but in its natural environment it could move to different places to alter the heat exchange between its internal and external environments. But behavioral thermoregulation is not the exclusive domain of ectotherms. It is also the first line of defense for endotherms. When the option is available, most animals select the thermal microenvironments that are best for them. They may change their posture, orient to the sun, move between sun and shade, and move between still air and moving air, as demonstrated by the lizard in our field experiment. Examples of more complex thermoregulatory behavior are nest construction and social behavior such as huddling. Humans select appropriate clothing and heat or cool their buildings. Behavioral thermoregulation is widespread in the animal kingdom.40.5.3 Both ectotherms and endotherms control blood flow to the skinJust as behavioral thermoregulation is not the exclusive domain of ectotherms, physiological thermoregulation is not the exclusive domain of endotherms. Both ectotherms and endotherms can alter the rate of heat exchange between their bodies and their environments by controlling the flow of blood to the skin. The skin is the interface between the internal and the external environment, and heat exchanges that alter body temperature occur across this interface. Heat exchange between the skin and the external environment occurs through four mechanisms: radiation, conduction, convection, and evaporation. Heat exchange between the internal environment and the skin occurs largely through blood flow. For example, when a person's body temperature rises as a result of exercise, blood flow to the skin increases, and the skin surface becomes quite warm. The heat brought to the skin by the blood is lost to the environment, and this loss helps to bring the body temperature back to normal. In contrast, when a person is exposed to cold, the blood vessels supplying the skin constrict, decreasing blood flow and heat transport to the skin and reducing heat loss to the environment.The control of blood flow to the skin can be an important adaptation for an ectotherm like the marine iguana of the Gal_agos archipelago. The Gal_agos are volcanic islands that lie on the equator, but they are bathed by very cold oceanic currents. Marine iguanas are reptiles that bask on black lava rocks on shore and swim in the cold ocean, where they feed on submarine algae. When the iguanas are feeding, they cool to the temperature of the sea, which makes them slower and more vulnerable to predators, and probably incapable of efficient digestion. They therefore alternate between feeding in the cold sea and basking in the sun on the hot rocks. It is advantageous for iguanas to retain body heat as long as possible while swimming and to warm up as fast as possible when basking. They adjust their cooling and heating rates by changing the flow of blood to the skin.40.5.4 Some ectotherms produce heatSome ectotherms raise their body temperatures by producing heat. For example, the powerful flight muscles of many insects must reach 35_-40_C before the insects can fly, and they must maintain these high temperatures during flight, even at air temperatures around 0_C. Such insects produce the required heat by contracting their flight muscles in a manner analogous to shivering in mammals. The heat-producing ability of these insects can be quite remarkable. Probably the most impressive case is a species of scarab beetle that lives mostly underground in mountains north of Los Angeles, California. To mate, these beetles come above ground, and males fly in search of females. They undertake this mating ritual at night, in winter, and only during snowstorms. Honeybees regulate temperature as a group. They live in large colonies consisting mostly of female worker bees that maintain the hive and rear the offspring of the single queen bee. During winter, honeybee workers combine their individual heat-producing abilities to regulate the temperature of the brood. They cluster around the brood and adjust their joint metabolic heat production and density of clustering so that the brood temperature remains remarkably constant, at about 34_C, even as the outside air temperature drops below freezing. Some reptiles use metabolic heat production to raise their body temperatures above the air temperature. The female Indian python protects her eggs by coiling her body around them. If the air temperature falls, she contracts the muscles of her body wall to generate heat. The python is able to maintain the temperature of her body-and therefore that of her eggs-considerably above air temperature.40.5.5 Some fish elevate body temperature by conserving metabolic heatIt is particularly difficult for fish to raise their body temperatures because blood pumped from their hearts goes to the gills to pick up oxygen, where it comes into close contact with cool water flowing over the thin gill membranes. The blood equilibrates with the outside water temperature before it travels through the rest of the body. Any heat transferred to the blood from active muscles is lost rapidly to the environment when the blood flows through the gills. It is thus surprising to find that some large, rapidly swimming fishes, such as bluefin tuna and great white sharks, can maintain temperature differences as great as 10_-15_C between their bodies and the surrounding water. The heat comes from their powerful swimming muscles, and the ability of these "hot" fish to conserve that heat is due to remarkable arrangements of their blood vessels. In the usual ("cold") fish circulatory system, oxygenated blood from the gills collects in a large dorsal vessel, the aorta, which travels through the center of the fish, distributing blood to all organs and muscles. "Hot" fish have a smaller central dorsal aorta. Most of their oxygenated blood is transported in large vessels just under the skin. Hence the cold blood from the gills is kept close to the surface of the fish. Smaller vessels transporting this cold blood into the muscle mass run parallel to the vessels transporting warm blood from the muscle mass back toward the heart. Since the vessels carrying the cold blood into the muscle are in close contact with the vessels carrying warm blood away, heat flows from the warm to the cold blood and is therefore trapped in the muscle mass. Because heat is exchanged between blood vessels carrying blood in opposite directions, this adaptation is called a countercurrent heat exchanger. It keeps the heat within the muscle mass, enabling the fish to have an internal body temperature considerably above the water temperature. Why is it advantageous for the fish to be warm? Each 10_C rise in muscle temperature increases the fish's sustainable power output almost threefold! 40.6 Thermoregulation in EndothermsEndotherms respond to changes in environmental temperature by changing their rate of heat production (which can be measured as metabolic rate). Within a narrow range of environmental temperatures called the thermoneutral zone, the metabolic rate of endotherms is low and independent of temperature. The metabolic rate of a resting animal at a temperature within the thermoneutral zone is called the basal metabolic rate. It is usually measured on animals that are quiet but awake, and that are not using energy for digestion or reproduction. A resting animal consumes energy at the basal metabolic rate just to carry out all of its minimal body functions. The basal metabolic rate of an endotherm is about six times greater than the metabolic rate of an ectotherm of the same size and at the same body temperature. A gram of mouse tissue consumes energy at a much higher rate than does a gram of lizard tissue when both tissues are at 37_C. This difference results from basic changes in cell metabolism that accompanied the evolution of endotherms from their ectothermic ancestors.40.6.1 Endotherms actively increase heat production or heat lossThe thermoneutral zone is bounded by a lower critical temperature and an upper critical temperature. Thermoregulatory responses of a mammal at temperatures ouside its thermoneutral zone. When the environmental temperature falls below the lower critical temperature, mammals can create heat for thermoregulation through shivering and nonshivering heat production. Birds use only shivering heat production. Shivering uses the contractile machinery of skeletal muscles to consume ATP without causing observable behavior.  The muscles pull against each other so that little movement other than a tremor results. All the energy from the conversion of ATP to ADP in this process is released as heat. Shivering heat production is perhaps too narrow a term; energy expenditure due to increased muscle tone and increased body movements also contributes to increased heat production in the cold. Most nonshivering heat production occurs in specialized adipose tissue called brown fat. This tissue looks brown because of its abundant mitochondria and rich blood supply. In brown fat cells, a protein called thermogenin uncouples proton movement from ATP production, allowing protons to leak across the inner mitochondrial membrane rather than having to pass through the ATP synthase protein and generate ATP (review the discussion of respiration in Chapter. As a result, metabolic fuels are consumed without producing ATP, but heat is still released. Brown fat is especially abundant in newborn infants of many mammalian species, in some adult mammals that are small and acclimatized to cold, and in mammals that hibernate.40.6.2 Decreasing heat loss is important for life in the coldThe coldest habitats on Earth are in the Arctic, the Antarctic, and at the peaks of high mountains. Many birds and mammals, but almost no reptiles or amphibians, live in very cold habitats. What adaptations besides endothermy characterize species that live in the cold? The most important adaptations of endotherms to cold environments are those that reduce heat loss to the environment. Since most heat is lost from the body surface, many cold-climate species have a smaller surface area than their warm-climate cousins, even when their body masses are the same. Rounder body shapes and shorter appendages reduce the surface area-to-volume ratios of some cold-climate species; compare, for example, the San Joaquin kit fox and the arctic fox. Another means of decreasing heat loss is to increase thermal insulation. Animals adapted to cold have much thicker layers of fur, feathers, or fat than do their warm-climate relatives. The fur of an arctic fox or a northern sled dog provides such good thermal insulation that those animals don't even begin to shiver until the air temperature drops as low as -20_C to -30_C. Fur and feathers are good insulators because they trap a layer of still, warm air close to the skin surface. If that air is displaced by water, insulation is drastically reduced. In many species, oil secretions spread through fur or feathers by grooming are critical for resisting wetting and maintaining a high level of insulation. Humans change their thermal insulation by putting on or taking off clothes. How do other animals do it? We have already discussed one excample, the ectothermic marine iguana, which controls blood flow to its skin. Increasing or decreasing blood flow to the skin is an important thermoregulatory adaptation for endotherms as well. In a hot environment, your skin feels hot because there is a high rate of blood flow through it, but when you sit in an overly airconditioned theater, your hands, feet, and other body surfaces feel cold as blood flow to those areas decreases.40.6.3 Evaporation of water is an effective way to lose heatFor highly insulated arctic animals, and for many large mammals in all climates, getting rid of excess heat can be a serious problem, especially during exercise. Arctic species usually have an area on the body surface, such as the abdomen, that has only a thin layer of fur and can act as a window for heat loss. Large mammals, such as elephants, rhinoceroses, and water buffalo, have little or no fur and seek places where they can wallow in water when the air temperature is too high. Having water in contact with the skin greatly increases heat loss because water has a much greater capacity for absorbing heat than air does. A gram of water absorbs about 580 calories of heat when it evaporates. Water is heavy, however, so animals do not carry an excess supply of it. Furthermore, hot environments tend to be arid places where water is a scarce resource. Therefore, evaporation of water by sweating or panting is usually a last resort for animals adapted to hot environments (recall the camels at the beginning of this chapter). Sweating and panting are active processes that require the expenditure of metabolic energy. That's why the metabolic rate increases when the upper critical temperature is exceeded. A sweating or panting animal is producing heat in the process of dissipating heat, which can be a losing battle. Animals can survive in environments that are below their lower critical temperature much better than they can in environments above their upper critical temperature. 40.7 The Vertebrate ThermostatThe thermoregulatory mechanisms and adaptations we have discussed are the controlled systems for the regulation of body temperature. These controlled systems must receive commands from a regulatory system that integrates information relevant to the regulation of body temperature. Such a regulatory system  can be thought of as a thermostat. All animals that thermoregulate, both vertebrate and invertebrate, must have regulatory systems, but here we will focus on the vertebrate thermostat. Where is the vertebrate thermostat? Its major integrative center is at the bottom of the brain in a structure called the hypothalamus. If you slide your tongue back as far as possible along the roof of your mouth, it will be just a few centimeters below your hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is a part of many regulatory systems, so we will refer to it again in the chapters to come. If the hypothalamus of a mammal's brain is damaged, the animal loses its ability to regulate its body temperature, which then rises in warm environments and falls in cold ones.40.7.1 The vertebrate thermostat uses feedback informationWhat information does the vertebrate thermostat use? In many species, the temperature of the hypothalamus itself is the major source of feedback information to the thermostat. Cooling the hypothalamus causes fish and reptiles to seek a warmer environment, and heating the hypothalamus causes them to seek a cooler environment. In mammals, cooling the hypothalamus can stimulate constriction of the blood vessels supplying the skin and increase metabolic heat production. Because it activates these thermoregulatory responses, cooling the hypothalamus causes the body temperature to rise. Conversely, warming the hypothalamus stimulates dilation of blood vessels supplying the skin and sweating or panting, and the overall body temperature falls. The hypothalamus appears to generate a set point like a setting on the thermostat of a house. When the temperature of the hypothalamus exceeds or drops below that set point, thermoregulatory responses (the controlled system) are activated to reverse the direction of temperature change. Hence, hypothalamic temperature is a negative feedback signal. Heating and cooling the hypothalamus show that an animal has separate set points for activating different thermoregulatory responses. If the hypothalamus of a mammal is cooled, the vessels supplying blood to the skin constrict at a specific hypothalamic temperature. A slightly lower hypothalamic temperature initiates shivering. If the hypothalamic temperature is then raised, shivering ceases; then blood vessels supplying the skin dilate; and at still higher hypothalamic temperatures, panting starts.We can describe the characteristics of hypothalamic control of each thermoregulatory response. For example, if we measure metabolic heat production while heating and cooling the hypothalamus, we can describe the results graphically. Within a certain range of hypothalamic temperatures, metabolic heat production remains low and constant, but cooling the hypothalamus below a certain level-a set point-stimulates increased metabolic heat production. The increase in heat production is proportional to how much the hypothalamus is cooled below the set point. This regulatory system is much more sophisticated than a simple on-off thermostat like the one in a house. The vertebrate thermoregulatory system integrates other sources of information in addition to hypothalamic temperature. It uses information about the temperature of the environment as registered by temperature sensors in the skin. Changes in environmental temperature shift the hypothalamic set points for thermoregulatory responses. In a warm environment you might have to cool the hypothalamus of a mammal to stimulate it to shiver, but in a cold environment you would have to warm the hypothalamus of the same animal to stop it from shivering. The set point for the metabolic heat production response is higher when the skin is cold and lower when the skin is warm. The temperature of the skin can be considered feedforward information that adjusts the hypothalamic set point. Many other factors also shift hypothalamic set points for responses. Set points are higher during wakefulness than during sleep, and they are higher during the active part of the daily cycle than during the inactive part, even if the animal is awake at both times.40.7.2 Fevers help the body fight infectionsA fever is a rise in body temperature in response to substances called pyrogens that are derived from bacteria or viruses that invade the body. We respond to many infectious illnesses by getting a fever.Growing evidence suggests that fevers are adaptive responses that help the body fight disease-causing organisms. The presence of a pyrogen in the body causes a rise in the hypothalamic set point for the heat production response. As a result, you shiver, put on a sweater, or crawl under a blanket, and your body temperature rises until it matches the new set point. At the higher body temperature you no longer feel cold, and you may not feel hot, but someone touching your forehead will say that you are "burning up." If you take an aspirin, it lowers your set point to normal. Now you feel hot, take off clothes, and even sweat until your elevated body temperature returns to normal.Why do we take aspirin for fevers and "feeling crummy"? The pyrogens entering the body are attacked by cells of the immune system called macrophages. One of the things the macrophages do is to release chemicals called interleukins, which sound the alarm to other cells of the immune system throughout the body and trigger responses that contribute to feeling crummy. The interleukins also raise the hypothalamic set point for metabolic heat production. Among the intracellular signals triggered by interleukins are prostaglandins. Aspirin is a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis, thus explaining how this miracle drug reduces fever and makes us feel better. Evidence suggests that moderate fevers help the body fight an infection. Some interesting studies were done on lizards that were given access to a heat lamp. These animals kept their body temperatures at about 38_C by adjusting their position with respect to the lamp. After they were injected with disease-causing bacteria, they spent more time close to the lamp and raised their body temperatures to 40_C and higher-they gave themselves fevers. To find out if the fever helped the lizards fight the bacteria, groups of lizards were given equal inoculations of bacteria, but were then placed in different incubators at 34_, 36_, 38_, 40_, and 42_C, respectively. All of the lizards at 34_C and 36_C died, about 25 percent at 38_C survived, and about 75 percent at 40_C and 42_C survived. Apparently fever helped the lizards fight the disease organisms. However, extreme fevers (for example, 40_C) can be dangerous to humans and must be reduced. Even more modest fevers can be dangerous to people who have weakened hearts or those who are seriously ill. A fetus can be endangered when a pregnant woman has a fever. Fever-reducing drugs may be important in such cases.40.7.3 Animals can save energy by turning down the thermostatHypothermia is the condition in which body temperature is below normal. It can result from a natural turning down of the thermostat, or from traumatic events such as starvation (lack of metabolic fuel), exposure, serious illness, or treatment by anesthesia. Many species of birds and mammals use regulated hypothermia as a means of surviving periods of cold and food scarcity. Some become hypothermic on a daily basis. Hummingbirds, for example, are very small endotherms and have a high metabolic rate. They could exhaust their metabolic reserves just getting through a single day without food. Hummingbirds and other small endotherms can extend the period over which they can survive without food by dropping their body temperature during the portion of day when they would normally be inactive. This adaptive hypothermia is called daily torpor. Body temperature can drop 10_-20_C during daily torpor, resulting in an enormous saving of metabolic energy. Regulated hypothermia can also last for days or even weeks, with drops to very low temperatures; this phenomenon is called hibernation. During the deep sleep of hibernation, the body's thermostat is turned down to an extremely low level to maximize energy conservation. Arousal from hibernation occurs when the hypothalamic set point returns to a normal level. Many hibernators maintain body temperatures close to the freezing point during hibernation. The metabolic rate needed to sustain an animal in hibernation may be only one-fiftieth its basal metabolic rate, an enormous saving of metabolic energy. Many species of mammals, such as bats, bears, and ground squirrels, hibernate, but only one species of bird, the poorwill, has been shown to hibernate. The ability of hibernators to reduce their thermoregulatory set points so dramatically probably evolved as an extension of the set point decrease that accompanies sleep even in nonhibernating species of mammals and birds.41 Animal HormonesIn shallow pools around the edge of Lake Tanganyika in east central Africa, brightly colored male cichlid fish stake out territories and vigorously defend them against neighboring males. These dominant males constantly patrol their territories and display their colorful sexual adornments for the benefit of females, who assemble in groups at the edge of the cichlid colony. The females are hard to see because they are inactive and protectively colored. When a female is ready to spawn, and is impressed by a male's territory and display, she enters his territory and lays her eggs in a spawning pit that the male has prepared. The male then fertilizes her eggs. At any one time, only about 10 percent of the males in the colony are displaying and holding territories. All the other males are small, nondescript, and nonaggressive like the females. If a dominant male is removed by a predator, however, the nondescript males fight over the vacated territory. The winner rapidly assumes the appearance and behavior of a dominant male: brightly colored, big, aggressive, and attractive to females.What accounts for this dramatic change? Russell Fernald and his students at Stanford University has shown that soon after the nondescript male's victory, certain cells in his brain enlarge and secrete a chemical message. This message triggers cells in the pituitary gland, which is outside of the brain, to secrete chemical messages in turn. Although secreted in tiny quantities, these molecules enter the blood and are transported around the body. Wherever they encounter a cell that has appropriate receptors, the molecules bind to the receptors and initiate reactions in the cell. These cellular reactions to the chemical message produce the characteristics of a dominant male. This change in the male cichlid is one example of how chemical messages, or hormones, can produce and coordinate anatomical, physiological, and behavioral changes in an animal. We explore many other examples in this chapter. We look first at the nature of hormones and their evolution, and then examine some of their roles in the control of invertebrate life cycles. But most of the chapter is devoted to vertebrate hormones: their functions, control, and molecular mechanisms of action. We pay particular attention to the extensive interactions between the systems of neural and hormonal information. In the process, we discuss several human diseases involving hormonal dysfunction. 41.1 Hormones and Their Actions 712In Chapter 40, we learned that control and regulation require information. This information is transmitted mostly as electric signals and as chemical signals. Electric signals are nerve impulses, a major focus of later chapters on the nervous system. Nerve impulses can be rapidly conducted over long distances to specific targets. Chemical signals are hormones, which are secreted by cells, diffuse locally in the extracellular fluid until they are picked up by the blood, and are distributed by the circulatory system. Because the secretion, diffusion, and circulation of hormones is much slower than the transmission of nerve impulses, hormones are not useful for controlling rapid actions such as those involved in cichlid fighting. Hormone action is good for coordinating longer-term developmental processes, such as the transition of a nondescript cichlid into a dominant, territorial, breeding male. Hormones control many long-term physiological responses, such as the secretion of digestive enzymes by our guts and the reproductive cycles of many species. A hormone is a chemical signal produced by certain cells of a multicellular organism and received by cells of the same organism. Cells that secrete hormones are called endocrine cells. To receive the hormonal message, a target cell must have appropriate receptors to which the hormone can bind. The binding of a hormone to its receptor activates mechanisms within the target cell that eventually lead to a response, which may be developmental, physiological, or behavioral. (In the case of the male cichlid, hormone release stimulates all three types of responses.) Hormonal signaling systems can be distinguished according to the distance over which their messages operate. Some hormones only act on target cells close to their sites of release; others act on target cells at distant locations in the body. Some chemical messages, called pheromones, even exert their effects on other organisms in the environment (see Chapter 52).41.1.1 Most hormones are distributed in the blood 713The classic hormone is a chemical message secreted by cells in minute amounts and distributed throughout the body by the circulatory system. Wherever such a hormone encounters a cell with a receptor to which it can bind, it triggers a response. The nature of the response depends on the responding cell. The same hormone can cause different responses in different types of cells. Consider the hormone epinephrine. If you step off a curb without looking and a car screeches to a halt right next to you, you jump, your heart starts to thump, and a whole set of protective actions are set in motion. The jump and the initial heart thumping are driven by your nervous system, which can react very quickly. Simultaneously, the nervous system stimulates endocrine cells just above your kidneys (adrenal cells) to secrete epinephrine. Within seconds, epinephrine is diffusing into your blood and circulating around your body to activate the many components of the fight-or-flight response. Epinephrine acts on the heart, blood vessels, liver, and fat cells. When it binds to its receptors in the heart, it causes the heart to beat faster and more strongly. It binds to receptors in the vessels that supply blood to your digestive tract, causing those vessels to constrict (digestion can wait!). Your heart is pumping more blood, and a greater percentage of that blood is going to the muscles needed for your escape. In the liver, epinephrine stimulates the breakdown of glycogen into glucose for a quick energy supply. In fatty tissue, it stimulates the breakdown of fats as another source of energy. These are just some of the many actions triggered by one hormone. They all contribute to increasing your chances of escaping a dangerous situation. Whether or not a cell responds to a hormone depends on whether it has receptors for that hormone, and how it responds depends on what kind of a cell it is. A single hormone can stimulate many different responses.41.1.2 Some hormones act locally 713Some hormones are released into the extracellular fluids in such tiny quantities, or they are so rapidly inactivated by degradative enzymes, or they are taken up so efficiently by local cells, that the circulation never has the chance to distribute them to distant target cells. Thus, these hormones act only locally. When a hormone affects cells near the secreting cell, it is said to have paracrine function. An example of a paracrine hormone is histamine, one of the mediators of inflammation. Histamine is released in damaged tissues by specialized cells called mast cells. When the skin is cut, the area around the cut becomes inflamed-red, hot, and swollen. Histamine causes this response by dilating the local blood vessels and making them more permeable ("leaky"), which allows blood plasma, including protective blood proteins and white blood cells, to move into the damaged tissue.A major class of paracrine hormones consists of the various growth factors, which stimulate the growth and differentiation of cells. Growth factors were first discovered when scientists attempted to culture cells outside of the body. Even when given all sorts of nutrients and optimal conditions, the cells did not grow well unless blood plasma or a tissue extract was added to the medium. The components necessary for growth were found to be specific molecules present in very small quantities. At present, about 50 specific growth factors are known, along with a complex group of receptors. Some examples are: Nerve growth factor (NGF), which promotes the survival and growth of nerve cells; Epidermal growth factor (EGF), which stimulates many kinds of cells to divide;  Vascular endothelial growth factor, which stimulates the growth and branching of blood vessels. The nerve cells called neurons can also be considered paracrine cells. As we will see in Chapter 44, a neuron communicates with another cell by means of a chemical message called a neurotransmitter, which travels over a very small distance to the target cell. In cases in which receptors for the hormone are on the secreting cell itself, the hormone acts as an autocrine message. Growth factors are examples of local chemical messages that can also act as autocrine messages for the purpose of negative feedback. The autocrine response prevents. the secretory cell from secreting too much of the hormone.41.1.3 Hormones do not evolve as rapidly as their functions 714Chemical signaling between cells exists even in single-celled organisms. Recall the life cycle of slime molds as described in Chapter 27. These protists lead solitary lives and reproduce by mitosis and fission as long as conditions are good. But when food and moisture become scarce, they secrete 3?,5?-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which acts as a chemical signal for the individual cells to aggregate into a slug, form a fruiting structure, and release spores. Thus, in this protist, a chemical message passed between cells influences and coordinates behavior, development, and physiology. The molecule responsible for this very primitive form of chemical communication between slime mold cells-cAMP-is involved in many hormonal signaling systems in multicellular animals. As you learned in Chapter 15, many molecular signals cause the production of cAMP within cells. This "second messenger" mediates a variety of responses within the cell via the phosphorylation of enzymes. With the evolution of increasingly complex multicellular animals, more and more molecules acquired signaling functions. Also, as physiological systems changed through evolution, many existing molecular signals acquired new functions. As a result, the same chemical substances are used as hormones in widely divergent species, but they may have completely different actions in different species.The hormone thyroxine, for example, is found in animal species ranging from mollusks and tunicates (sea squirts) to humans. Its function is unknown in invertebrates, but it is produced in an organ that is involved in feeding. In frogs, thyroxine is essential for the metamorphosis from tadpole to adult. In mammals, thyroxine elevates cellular metabolism. Prolactin is another example of a hormone that evolved different functions in different species. Prolactin stimulates milk production in female mammals after they give birth. In pigeons and doves, prolactin stimulates the production of crop milk, a substance secreted from the crop that is fed to the young. Prolactin causes amphibians to prepare for reproduction by seeking water. In fishes, such as salmon, that migrate between salt water and fresh water to breed, prolactin regulates the mechanisms that maintain osmotic balance with the changing environment. In all of these cases prolactin is involved in reproductive processes, but as those processes have changed through evolution, so has the information signaled by the hormone. In summary, the structures of the molecules involved in chemical signaling are highly conserved-they have changed little throughout evolution-but their functions have changed dramatically.41.1.4 Endocrine glands secrete hormones 714Some endocrine cells are distributed as single cells within a tissue. Many hormones of the digestive tract, for example, are produced and secreted by isolated cells in the lining of the tract. As the contents of the digestive tract come into contact with these cells, they release their hormones, which enter the blood and, like epinephrine, circulate throughout the body and activate cells that have appropriate receptors. Many hormones, however, are secreted by aggregations of endocrine cells that form secretory organs called endocrine glands. Animals have two types of glands. Exocrine glands, such as sweat glands and salivary glands, release secretions that are not hormones through ducts that lead outside the body. Sweat gland ducts, for example, open onto the surface of the skin, and salivary gland ducts open into the mouth. Glands that secrete hormones and do not have ducts are called endocrine glands; they secrete their products directly into the extracellular fluid. Vertebrates have nine discrete endocrine glands, which collectively make up the endocrine system. 41.2 Hormonal Control of Molting and Development in Insects 715Many hormones of invertebrate animals have multiple functions. In this chapter we cannot do justice to the diversity of hormones in the invertebrates, but we'll discuss two important aspects of the lives of many invertebrates that are controlled by hormonal mechanisms: molting and metamorphosis.41.2.1 Hormones from the head control molting in insects 715Because insects have rigid exoskeletons, their growth is episodic, punctuated with molts (shedding) of the exoskeleton (see Chapter 32). Each growth stage between two molts is called an instar. The British physiologist Sir Vincent Wigglesworth was a pioneer in the study of the hormonal control of growth and development in insects. Wigglesworth conducted experiments on the blood-sucking bug Rhodnius, which undergoes incomplete metamorphosis. Upon hatching, Rhodnius is nearly a miniature version of an adult, but it lacks some adult features. Rhodnius molts five times before developing into a mature adult; a blood meal triggers each episode of molting and growth. Rhodnius is a hardy experimental animal; it can live a long time even after it is decapitated. If decapitated about an hour after it has a blood meal, Rhodnius may live for up to a year, but it does not molt. If decapitated a week after its blood meal, it does molt. These observations led Wigglesworth to the hypothesis that something diffusing slowly from the head controls molting.The proof  of this hypothesis came from a clever experiment in which Wigglesworth decapitated two Rhodnius: one that had just had its blood meal and another that had had its blood meal a week earlier. The two decapitated bodies were connected with a short piece of glass tubing-and they both molted. Thus one or more substances from the bug fed a week earlier crossed through the glass tube and stimulated molting in the other bug. We now know that two hormones working in sequence regulate molting: Cells in the brain produce brain hormone. Brain hormone is transported to and stored in a pair of  structures attached to the brain, the corpora cardiaca (singular corpus cardiacum). After appropriate stimulation (which for Rhodnius is a blood meal) the corpora cardiaca release brain hormone, which diffuses to an endocrine gland, the prothoracic gland. Brain hormone stimulates the prothoracic gland to release the hormone ecdysone. Ecdysone diffuses to target tissues and stimulates molting. The control of molting by brain hormone and ecdysone is a general mechanism in insects. The nervous system receives various types of information relevant in determining the optimal timing for growth and development. It makes sense, therefore, that the nervous system should control the endocrine gland that produces the hormone that orchestrates all the physiological processes involved in development and molting. Later in this chapter we will see similar links between the nervous system and endocrine glands in vertebrates.41.2.2 Juvenile hormone controls development in insects 716The Rhodnius decapitation experiments yielded a curious result: Regardless of the instar used, the decapitated bug always molted directly into an adult form. Additional experiments by Wigglesworth demonstrated that a hormone other than those responsible for molting determines whether a bug molts into another juvenile instar or into an adult. Because the head of Rhodnius is long, it was possible to remove just the front part of the head, which contains the  cells that secrete and release brain hormone, while leaving intact the rear part. That rear part contains two other endocrine structures called the corpora allata (singular corpus allatum). When fourth-instar bugs that had been fed one week earlier were partly decapitated, leaving the corpora allata intact, they molted into fifth instars, not into adults. This experiment, was followed up by more experiments using glass tubes to connect individual bugs, allowing body fluid transfer between them. When an unfed, completely decapitated, fifth-instar bug was connected to a fourth-instar bug that had been fed but had had only the front part of its head removed, both bugs molted into juvenile forms. A substance coming from the rear part of the head of the fourth-instar bug prevented the expected result that both bugs would molt into adult forms. We now know that the substance is juvenile hormone and that it comes from the corpora allata. As long as juvenile hormone is present, Rhodnius molts into another juvenile instar. The corpora allata normally stop producing juvenile hormone during the fifth instar. If juvenile hormone is absent, the bug molts into the adult form. The control of development by juvenile hormone is more complex in insects that, like butterflies, undergo complete metamorphosis. These animals undergo dramatic developmental changes between instars. The fertilized egg hatches into a larva, which feeds and molts several times, becoming bigger and bigger. Then it enters an inactive stage called a pupa. It undergoes major body reorganization as a pupa, and finally emerges as an adult.An excellent example of complete metamorphosis is provided by the silkworm moth, Hyalophora cecropia. As long as juvenile hormone is present in high concentrations, larvae molt into larvae. When the level of juvenile hormone falls, larvae molt into pupae. Because no juvenile hormone is produced in pupae, they molt into adults. In our perpetual war against insects, juvenile hormone is a new weapon. Synthetic forms of juvenile hormone can be distributed in the environment to prevent the development of juvenile insects into adults capable of reproduction. However, as you might expect from the fact that hormone structures are highly conserved, such a weapon is not without potentially serious side effects. First, it is not selective in its effects on insects and can affect species that are beneficial as well as those that are pests. Second, the synthetic juvenile hormone could have actions in vertebrates that are not yet known. The existence and function of insect hormones was experimentally demonstrated many years before the hormones were identified chemically. That is not surprising when you consider the tiny amounts of certain hormones that exist in an organism. In one of the earliest studies of ecdysone, biochemists produced only 250 mg of pure ecdysone (about one-fourth the weight of an apple seed) from 4 tons of silkworms! 41.3 Vertebrate Endocrine Systems 717The list of chemical messages in the bodies of vertebrates is long and growing longer. To make the subject manageable, we focus mostly on the hormones of humans-how they function and how they are controlled. Table 41_1 presents an overview of the hormones of humans (most of which are found in all other mammals as well). Notice that the column listing the target tissues of these hormones includes every organ system of the body. We begin this survey with the pituitary gland because it plays a central role in the endocrine system. The pituitary is a link between the nervous system and many endocrine glands. It secretes some hormones that are actually produced by neurons in the brain, and under the influence of still other brain hormones, it produces a number of its own hormones, which control the activities of various endocrine glands throughout the body. For these reasons, the pituitary has been called "the master gland."41.3.1 The pituitary develops from outpocketings of the mouth and brain 717The pituitary gland sits in a depression at the bottom of the skull just over the back of the roof of the mouth. It is attached to the part of the brain called the hypothalamus, which is involved in many homeostatic regulatory systems (see Chapter 40). The pituitary has two distinct parts that have different functions and separate origins during development. The anterior pituitary originates as an outpocketing of the embryonic mouth cavity, and the posterior pituitary originates as an outpocketing of the developing brain in the region that becomes the hypothalamus. The posterior pituitary releases two hormones, antidiuretic hormone  and oxytocin. Both are small peptides synthesized in neurons in the hypothalamus. Hormones that are produced and released by neurons are called neurohormones. Antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin move down long extensions (axons) of the neurons that produce them, through the pituitary stalk into the posterior pituitary, where they are stored in the nerve endings. How do they move down the axons?. In the bodies of the neurons, these neurohormones are packaged into vesicles. Proteins called kinesins grab onto the vesicles and, powered by ATP, "walk" step by step down microtubules in the axons. The main action of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is to increase the amount of water conserved by the kidneys. When ADH secretion is high, the kidneys resorb more water and produce only a small volume of highly concentrated urine. When ADH secretion is low, the kidneys produce a large volume of dilute urine. The posterior pituitary increases its release of ADH whenever blood pressure falls or the blood becomes too salty. We will discuss the mechanism of ADH action in Chapter 51. ADH is also known as vasopressin because it causes the constriction of peripheral blood vessels as a means of elevating blood pressure. When a woman is about to give birth, her posterior pituitary releases oxytocin, which stimulates the contractions of the muscles that push the baby out of her body. Oxytocin also brings about the flow of milk from the mother's breasts. The baby's suckling stimulates nerve cells in the mother, causing the secretion of oxytocin. Even the sight and sounds of her baby can cause a nursing mother to secrete oxytocin and release milk from her breasts.Four hormones released by the anterior pituitary (thyrotropin, adrenocorticotropin, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone) control the activities of other endocrine glands and thus are called tropic hormones. Each tropic hormone is produced by a different type of pituitary cell. We will say more about these tropic hormones when we describe their target glands (thyroid, adrenal cortex, testes, and ovaries) later in this chapter and in the next. The other hormones produced by the anterior pituitary influence tissues that are not endocrine glands. These hormones are growth hormone, prolactin, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, endorphins, and enkephalins. Growth hormone (GH) consists of about 200 amino acids and acts on a wide variety of tissues to promote growth directly and indirectly. One of its important direct effects is to stimulate cells to take up amino acids. Growth hormone promotes growth indirectly by stimulating the liver to produce chemical messages that stimulate the growth of bone and cartilage. Thus, in some of its actions, growth hormone can also be considered a tropic hormone. Overproduction of growth hormone in children causes gigantism, and underproduction causes dwarfism. Beginning in the late 1950s, children diagnosed as having a serious deficiency of growth hormone were treated with human growth hormone extracted from human pituitaries in cadavers. The treatment was successful in stimulating substantial growth, but it could be made available to only small numbers of patients. A year's supply of human growth hormone for one individual required up to 50 pituitaries. In the mid-1980s, scientists using genetic engineering technology isolated the gene for human growth hormone and introduced it into bacteria, which produced enough of the hormone to make it widely available.Preventing pituitary dwarfism is now feasible and affordable, but the availability of growth hormone raises new questions. Should every child at the lower end of the height charts be treated? Should a normal child whose parents think basketball stardom is assured if she is tall be given growth hormone? These types of questions are impossible to answer with scientific data alone. Prolactin, another hormone produced by the anterior pituitary, stimulates the production and secretion of milk in female mammals. In some mammals, prolactin also functions as an important hormone during pregnancy. In human males, prolactin plays a role along with other pituitary hormones in controlling the endocrine function of the testes. Endorphins and enkephalins are the body's "natural opiates." In the brain, these molecules act as neurotransmitters in pathways that control pain. The significance of their release from the anterior pituitary is unknown. Interestingly, the production of endorphins and enkephalins in the pituitary is encoded by the same gene that encodes at least two other pituitary hormones. The gene actually encodes a large parent molecule called pro-opiomelanocortin. This large protein molecule is cleaved to produce several peptides, some of which have hormonal functions. Adrenocorticotropin, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, endorphins, and enkephalins all result from the cleavage of pro-opiomelanocortin.Because the anterior pituitary produces tropic hormones that control other endocrine tissues, it acquired the designation "master gland." But we now know that this "master" is under still higher control by the hypothalamus, and that their interaction integrates nervous system and endocrine system functions. The hypothalamus receives information about conditions in the body and in the external environment through the nervous system. If the connection between the hypothalamus and the pituitary is experimentally cut, pituitary hormones are no longer released in response to changes in the environment or in the body. If pituitary cells are maintained in culture, extracts of hypothalamic tissue stimulate some of those cells to release their hormones into the culture medium. Therefore, scientists hypothesized that secretions of the hypothalamic cells control the activities of anterior pituitary cells. Although hypothalamic neurons do not extend into the anterior pituitary as they do into the posterior pituitary, a special set of portal blood vessels connects the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary. It was thus proposed that secretions from nerve endings in the hypothalamus enter the blood and are conducted down the portal vessels to the anterior pituitary, where they cause the release of anterior pituitary hormones.In the 1960s, two large teams of scientists, led by Roger Guillemin and Andrew Schally, initiated the search for the hypothalamic neurohormones. Because the amounts of such hormones in any individual mammal would be tiny, massive numbers of hypothalami from pigs and sheep were collected from slaughterhouses and shipped to laboratories in refrigerated trucks. One extraction effort began with the hypothalami from 270,000 sheep and yielded only 1 mg of purified thyrotropin-releasing hormone, or TRH, which was the first hypothalamic releasing (that is, release-stimulating) hormone isolated and characterized. Biochemical analysis of this pure sample revealed that TRH is a simple tripeptide consisting of glutamine, histidine, and proline. TRH causes certain anterior pituitary cells to release the tropic hormone thyrotropin, which in turn stimulates the activity of the thyroid gland. Soon after discovering thyrotropin-releasing hormone, Guillemin's and Schally's teams identified gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates certain anterior pituitary cells to release the tropic hormones that control the activity of the gonads (the ovaries and the testes). For these discoveries, Guillemin and Schally received the 1972 Nobel prize in medicine. Many more hypothalamic neurohormones, including both releasing hormones and release-inhibiting hormones, are now known.41.3.2 Negative feedback loops control hormone secretion 721As well as being controlled by hypothalamic releasing and release-inhibiting hormones, the endocrine cells of the anterior pituitary are also under negative feedback control by the hormones of the target glands they stimulate. For example, the hormone cortisol, produced by the adrenal gland in response to adrenocorticotropin, returns to the pituitary in the circulating blood and inhibits further adrenocorticotropin release. Cortisol also acts as a negative feedback signal at the level of the hypothalamus, inhibiting the release of adrenocorticotropin-releasing hormone. In some cases a tropic hormone of the anterior pituitary also exerts negative feedback control on the hypothalamic cells producing the corresponding releasing hormone.41.3.3 Thyroxine controls cell metabolism 722The thyroid gland wraps around the front of the windpipe (trachea) and expands into a lobe on either side. The thyroid gland produces the hormones thyroxine and calcitonin.Thyroxine is synthesized in thyroid cells from two molecules of diiodotyrosine, which is the amino acid tyrosine with two atoms of iodine chemically bonded to it. Thus, a thyroxine molecule has four atoms of iodine, and is called T4. Thyroid cells also produce triiodothyronine, a version of thyroxine that has only three atoms of iodine and is called T3. The thyroid usually makes and releases about four times as much T4 as T3. T3 is the more active hormone in the cells of the body, but when T4 is in circulation, it can be converted to T3 by an enzyme. Therefore, when you read about thyroxine, keep in mind that the actions discussed are primarily due to T3.Thyroxine in mammals plays many roles in regulating cell metabolism. It elevates the metabolic rates of most cells and tissues and promotes the use of carbohydrates rather than fats for fuel. Exposure to cold for several days leads to an increased release of thyroxine, an increased conversion of T4 to T3, and an increase in basal metabolic rate. Thyroxine is especially crucial during development and growth, as it promotes amino acid uptake and protein synthesis by cells. Insufficient thyroxine in a human fetus or growing child greatly retards physical and mental growth, resulting in a condition known as cretinism. The tropic hormone thyrotropin from the anterior pituitary activates the thyroid cells that produce thyroxine. TRH (thyrotropin-releasing hormone) produced in the hypothalamus and transported to the anterior pituitary through the portal blood vessels activates the thyrotropin-producing pituitary cells. The brain uses environmental information such as temperature or day length to determine whether to increase or decrease the secretion of TRH. There is a very important negative feedback loop in this sequence of steps: Circulating thyroxine inhibits the response of the pituitary cells to TRH. Less thyrotropin is released when thyroxine levels are high, and more thyrotropin is released when thyroxine levels are low.41.3.4 Thyroid dysfunction causes goiter 722A goiter is an enlarged thyroid gland, which causes a pronounced bulge on the front and sides of the neck. Goiter can be associated with either hyperthyroidism (very high levels of thyroxine) or hypothyroidism (very low levels of thyroxine). Hyperthyroid goiter results when the negative feedback mechanism fails to turn off the thyroid cells even though blood levels of thyroxine are high. The most common cause of hyperthyroidism is an autoimmune disease in which an antibody to the thyrotropin receptor is produced. This antibody can bind to the receptor and cause the thyroid cells to produce and release thyroxine. Even though blood levels of thyrotropin may be quite low because of the negative feedback from thyroxine, the thyroid remains maximally stimulated, and it grows bigger. Hyperthyroid patients have high metabolic rates, are jumpy and nervous, usually feel hot, and may have a buildup of fat behind the eyeballs, causing their eyes to bulge. Hypothyroid goiter results when there is not enough circulating thyroxine to turn off thyrotropin production. Its most common cause is a deficiency of dietary iodide, without which the thyroid gland cannot make thyroxine. Without sufficient thyroxine, thyrotropin levels remain high, so the thyroid continues to produce large amounts of nonfunctional thyroxine and becomes very large. The symptoms of hypothyroidism are low metabolism, intolerance of cold, and general physical and mental sluggishness. Worldwide, goiter affects about 5 percent of the population. The addition of iodide to table salt has greatly reduced the incidence of the condition in industrialized nations, but goiter is still common in the less industrialized countries of the world.41.3.5 Calcitonin reduces blood calcium 723Another hormone released by the thyroid gland is calcitonin, although it is not produced by the same cells that produce thyroxine. Calcitonin helps reduce the levels of calcium circulating in the blood. Bone is a huge repository of calcium in the body and is continually being remodeled. Cells called osteoclasts break down bone and release calcium; osteoblasts, on the other hand, use circulating calcium to deposit new bone. Calcitonin decreases the activity of osteclasts and stimulates the activity of osteoblasts, thus shifting the balance from adding calcium ions to the blood to removing them. Calcitonin plays an important role in preventing bone loss in women during pregnancy. However, regulation of blood calcium levels is influenced more strongly by parathormone than it is by calcitonin.41.3.6 Parathormone elevates blood calcium 724The parathyroid glands are four tiny structures embedded on the surface of the thyroid gland. Their single hormone product is parathyroid hormone, or parathormone, a critical control in the regulation of blood calcium levels. Growth and remodeling of bone require calcium, and muscle contraction and nerve function are severely impaired if the blood calcium level rises or falls by as little as 30 percent of normal values. A decrease in blood calcium triggers the release of parathormone, which stimulates osteoclasts to dissolve bone and release calcium to the blood. Parathormone also prevents calcium in the blood from being lost in the urine by promoting calcium resorption by the kidneys. It also promotes the activation of vitamin D, which stimulates the digestive tract to absorb calcium from food. Parathormone and calcitonin act antagonistically to regulate blood calcium levels: Parathormone elevates and calcitonin reduces. A similar antagonistic relationship is true of hormones of the pancreas, which regulate blood glucose levels.41.3.7 Insulin and glucagon regulate blood glucose 724Before the 1920s, diabetes mellitus was a fatal disease, characterized by weakness, lethargy, and body wasting. The disease was known to be connected somehow with the pancreas, a gland located just below the stomach, and with abnormal glucose metabolism, but the link was not clear. Today we know that diabetes mellitus is caused by a lack of the hormone insulin, or by a lack of responsiveness of target tissues to that hormone. For patients in which the hormone is lacking, insulin replacement therapy is an extremely successful treatment. At present, more than 1.5 million people with diabetes in the United States lead almost normal lives through the use of manufactured insulin. Insulin binds to a receptor on the plasma membranes of target cells, and this insulin-receptor complex allows glucose to enter the cell. In the absence of insulin or insulin receptors, glucose accumulates in the blood until it is lost in the urine. High levels of blood glucose cause water to move from cells into the blood by osmosis, and the kidneys increase urine output to excrete excess fluid volume from the blood.* *The name diabetes refers to the copious production of urine. Mellitus (Greek for "honey") reflects the fact that the urine of an untreated diabetic is sweet. Because glucose cannot enter cells in the absence of insulin, the cells must use fat and protein for fuel instead of glucose. As a result, the body of the untreated diabetic wastes away, and critical tissues and organs are damaged. For centuries the prospects for a person with diabetes were bleak. A change in this outlook came almost overnight in 1921, when medical doctor Frederick Banting and medical student Charles Best of the University of Toronto discovered that they could reduce the symptoms of diabetes by injecting an extract they prepared from pancreatic tissue. The active component of the extract that Banting and Best prepared was found to be a small protein hormone-insulin-consisting of 51 amino acids.Insulin is produced in clusters of endocrine cells in the pancreas. These clusters are called islets of Langerhans after the German medical student who discovered them. There are several types of cells in the islets: Beta (?) cells produce and secrete insulin. Alpha (?) cells produce and secrete the hormone glucagon, which has effects opposite those of insulin. Delta (?) cells produce the hormone somatostatin. The rest of the pancreas is an exocrine gland that produces enzymes and secretions that travel through ducts to the intestine, where they play roles in digestion. After a meal, the concentration of glucose in the blood rises as glucose is absorbed from the food in the gut. This increase stimulates the pancreas to release insulin. Insulin stimulates cells to use glucose as fuel and to convert it into storage products such as glycogen and fat. When the gut contains no more food, the glucose concentration in the blood falls, and the pancreas stops releasing insulin. As a result, most cells of the body shift to using glycogen and fat rather than glucose for fuel. If the concentration of glucose in the blood falls below normal, the islet cells release glucagon, which stimulates the liver to convert glycogen back to glucose to resupply the blood. These effects and conversions will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 50.41.3.8 Somatostatin is a hormone of the brain and the gut 724Somatostatin is released from the pancreas in response to rapid rises of glucose and amino acids in the blood. This hormone has paracrine functions within the islets: It inhibits the release of both insulin and glucagon. Its actions outside the pancreas slow the digestive activities of the gut. Pancreatic somatostatin extends the period of time during which nutrients are absorbed from the gut and used by the cells of the body. Somatostatin also acts as a hypothalamic neurohormone that inhibits the release of growth hormone and thyrotropin by the pituitary.41.3.9 The adrenal gland is two glands in one 724An adrenal gland sits above each kidney just below the middle of your back. Functionally and anatomically, an adrenal gland consists of a gland within a gland. The core, called the adrenal medulla, produces the hormone epinephrine (also known as adrenaline) and, to a lesser degree, norepinephrine (or noradrenaline). Surrounding the medulla (as an apricot surrounds its pit) is the adrenal cortex, which produces other hormones. The medulla develops from nervous system tissue and is under the control of the nervous system; the cortex is under hormonal control, largely by adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary. The adrenal medulla produces epinephrine in response to stressful situations, arousing the body to action. As we saw earlier in this chapter, epinephrine increases heart rate, breathing rate, and blood pressure, and diverts blood flow to active skeletal muscles and away from the gut. These fight-or-flight reactions can be stimulated by physically threatening events, such as encountering a mugger, or by events that are mentally stressful, such as giving a public speech or taking a test. In situations of mental stress, many of the responses (such as increased heart and breathing rates) that would be useful for escaping physical danger are not useful, and can even be inconvenient or harmful.Epinephrine and norepinephrine (a neurotransmitter involved in physiological regulation) bind to receptors on the surfaces of target cells. These receptors can be grouped into two general types, ?-adrenergic and ?-adrenergic receptors (each with at least two subtypes), which stimulate different actions within cells. Epinephrine acts equally on both types, but norepinephrine acts mostly on ?-adrenergic receptors. Therefore, drugs called beta blockers, which selectively block ?-adrenergic receptors, can reduce the fight-or-flight responses to epinephrine without disrupting the regulatory functions of norepinephrine. The cells of the adrenal cortex use cholesterol to produce three classes of steroid hormones. Collectively, these hormones are called the corticosteroids. The glucocorticoids influence blood glucose concentrations as well as other aspects of fat, protein, and carbohydrate metabolism. The mineralocorticoids influence the ionic balance of extracellular fluids. The sex steroids stimulate sexual development and reproductive activity. The sex steroids are secreted in only negligible amounts by the adrenal cortex. They will be discussed in the next section, on gonadal hormones. Aldosterone, the main mineralocorticoid, stimulates the kidney to conserve sodium and to excrete potassium. If the adrenal glands are removed from an animal, it must have sodium added to its diet, or its sodium will be depleted and it will die. One human patient with a nonfunctional adrenal gland compensated by salting her food heavily and, in addition, ate a 60-pound block of salt in the course of a year.The main glucocorticoid, cortisol, is critical for mediating the body's response to stress. As we have seen, your immediate reaction to a frightening situation is stimulated by your nervous system and by the release of epinephrine. This fight-or-flight response  ensures that your muscles will have enough oxygen and glucose to fuel your escape. You have a limited amount of blood glucose, however, and you need to conserve it for your muscles and your brain. Within minutes of the frightening stimulus, blood cortisol level rises. Cortisol stimulates cells not critical for your escape to decrease their use of blood glucose and shift instead to utilizing fats and proteins for energy. This is not a time to feel sick, have allergic reactions, or heal wounds, so cortisol also blocks immune system reactions. This is why cortisol is useful for reducing inflammations and allergies. Cortisol release is controlled by ACTH from the anterior pituitary, which in turn is controlled by the hypothalamic adrenocorticotropin-releasing hormone. Because the cortisol response to a stressor has this chain of steps, each involving secretion, diffusion, circulation, and cell activation, it is much slower than the epinephrine response. Turning off the cortisol response is as important as turning it on. A study of stress in rats showed that old rats could turn on their stress responses as effectively as young rats, but that they had lost the ability to turn them off as rapidly. As a result, they suffered from the well-known consequences of stress: ulcers, cardiovascular problems, strokes, impaired immune system function, and increased susceptibility to cancers and other diseases. Further research showed that turning off stress responses involves the long-loop negative feedback action of cortisol on cells in the brain, which causes a decrease in the release of adrenocorticotropin-releasing hormone. Repeated activation of this negative feedback mechanism leads to a gradual loss of cortisol-sensitive cells in the brain, and therefore a decreased ability to terminate stress responses.41.3.10 The sex steroids are produced by the gonads 726The gonads-the testes of the male and the ovaries of the female-produce hormones as well as gametes. Most of the gonadal hormones are steroids synthesized from cholesterol. The male steroids are collectively called androgens, and the dominant one is testosterone. The female steroids are estrogens and progesterone. The dominant estrogen is estradiol. The sex steroids have important developmental effects: They determine whether a fetus develops into a female or a male. (A fetus is the latter stage of an embryo; a human embryo is called a fetus from the eighth week of pregnancy to the moment of birth.) After birth, the sex steroids control the maturation of the reproductive organs and the development and maintenance of secondary sexual characteristics, such as breasts and facial hair. The sex steroids begin to exert effects in the human embryo in the seventh week of development. Until that time, the embryo has the potential to develop into either sex. In mammals and birds, the ultimate instructions for sex determination reside in the genes. In mammals, individuals that receive two X chromosomes normally become females, and individuals that receive an X and a Y chromosome normally become males. These genetic instructions are carried out through the production and action of the sex steroids, and the potential for error exists.The presence of a Y chromosome normally causes the embryonic, undifferentiated gonads to begin producing androgens in the seventh week. In response to the androgens, the reproductive system develops into that of a male. If androgens are not produced at that time, female reproductive structures develop. In other words, androgens are required to trigger male development in humans. The opposite situation exists in birds: Male characteristics develop unless estrogens are present to trigger female development. Occasionally the hormonal control of sexual development does not work perfectly, resulting in intersex individuals. The most extreme (but rare) case is a true hermaphrodite, who has both testes and ovaries. Pseudohermaphrodites have the gonads of one sex and the external sex organs of the other. For example, an XY fetus will develop testes, but if his tissues are insensitive to the androgens they produce because his androgen receptors do not function, the testes will remain within the abdomen, and the external sex organs and the secondary sexual characteristics of a female will develop.41.3.11 Changes in control of sex steroid production initiate puberty 726Sex steroids have dramatic effects at puberty-the time of sexual maturation in humans. Sex steroids are produced at low levels by the juvenile gonads, but their production increases rapidly at the beginning of puberty-around the age of 12 to 13 years. Why does this sudden increase occur? In the juvenile, as in the adult, the production of sex steroids by the ovaries and testes is controlled by the anterior pituitary tropic hormones luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which together are called the gonadotropins. The production of these tropic hormones is under the control of the hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Prior to puberty, the gonads are capable of responding to gonadotropins, and the pituitary is capable of responding to GnRH. But prior to puberty the hypothalamus produces only very low levels of GnRH. Puberty is initiated by a reduction in the sensitivity of hypothalamic GnRH-producing cells to negative feedback from sex steroids and from gonadotropins. As a result, GnRH release increases, stimulating increased production of gonadotropins and hence increased production of sex steroids. In females, increasing levels of LH and FSH at puberty stimulate the ovaries to begin producing the female sex hormones. The increased circulating levels of these hormones initiate the development of the traits of a sexually mature woman: enlarged breasts, vagina, and uterus; broad hips; increased subcutaneous fat; pubic hair; and the initiation of the menstrual cycle. In the male, an increasing level of LH stimulates groups of cells in the testes to synthesize androgens, which in turn initiate the profound physiological, anatomical, and psychological changes associated with adolescence. The voice deepens, hair begins to grow on the face and body, and the testes and penis grow. Androgens also help skeletal muscles grow, especially when they are exercised regularly.Natural muscle development can be exaggerated by both men and women who want to increase their maximum strength in athletic competition if they take synthetic androgens-called anabolic steroids. However, anabolic steroids have serious negative side effects. In women, their use causes the breasts and uterus to shrink, the clitoris to enlarge, menstruation to become irregular, facial and body hair to grow, and the voice to deepen. In men, the testes shrink, hair loss increases, the breasts enlarge, and sterility can result. You can understand the causes of some of these side effects by considering the negative feedback effects of sex steroids on the production of LH and FSH. Other side effects are even more serious. Continued use of anabolic steroids greatly increases the risk of heart disease, certain cancers, kidney damage, and personality disorders such as depression, mania, psychoses, and extreme aggression. Most official athletic organizations, including the International Olympic Committee, ban the use of anabolic steroids.41.3.12 Melatonin is involved in biological rhythms and photoperiodicity 727The pineal gland is situated between the cerebral hemispheres of the brain on a little stalk. It produces the hormone melatonin from the amino acid tryptophan. In various vertebrates, melatonin is involved in biological rhythms and photoperiodicity. Photoperiodicity is the phenomenon whereby seasonal changes in day length cause physiological changes in animals. Many species, for example, come into reproductive condition when the days begin to get longer. Humans are not photoperiodic, but melatonin in humans may play a role in entraining the daily rhythm of physiological and behavioral activities to the daily cycle of light and dark. The release of melatonin by the pineal occurs in the dark and therefore marks the length of the night. Exposure to light inhibits the release of melatonin. The pineal of birds is directly sensitive to light, but in mammals, the light response is mediated through the eyes via a group of cells at the base of the brain, which generates a daily rhythm for many physiological functions of the body. We will learn more about this brain structure in Chapter 52.41.3.13 The list of other hormones is long 727We have discussed the major endocrine glands and the "classic" hormones in this chapter, but there are many hormones we have not mentioned. Examples include the hormones produced in the digestive tract that help organize the way the gut processes food (see Chapter 50). Even the heart has endocrine functions. When blood pressure rises and causes the walls of the heart to stretch, certain cells in the walls of the heart release atrial natriuretic hormone. This hormone increases the excretion of sodium ions and water by the kidneys, thereby lowering blood volume and blood pressure. As we discuss the organ systems of the body in the chapters that follow, we will frequently mention hormones that their tissues produce, or hormones that control their functions. 41.4 Mechanisms of Hormone Action 728The hormones we have discussed are released in very small quantities, yet they can cause large responses in cells or tissues all over the body, and these responses can be quite specific in different cells. For example, we have discussed the many dramatic effects of testosterone, yet its concentration in the blood of adult human males is only about 30-100 ng/ml. How can hormones in such tiny quantities have such strong and selective actions?41.4.1 The actions of hormones depend on receptors and signal transduction pathways 728The selective action of hormones is explained by the fact that only cells with appropriate receptors respond to a hormone. Also, in different types of cells, the receptors for a particular hormone can be linked to different response mechanisms. There are numerous signal transduction pathways in cells, and therefore the response of a cell to a hormone depends both on the receptors and on the signal transduction pathways that exist in that cell. Epinephrine, for example, acts through four different receptors and several signal transduction pathways to induce a wide variety of responses in different tissues. The strength of hormone action frequently results from signal transduction cascades that amplify the original signal, as described in Chapter 15. An example is the response of liver cells to epinephrine. A single molecule of epinephrine binding to its receptor on a liver cell can result in that liver cell releasing millions of molecules of glucose into the blood.41.4.2 Hormone receptors are either on the cell surface or in the cell interior 728Hormones can be classified as lipid-soluble or water-soluble, and that classification relates to where their receptors are. Lipid-soluble hormones, such as the steroid hormones and thyroxine, can diffuse through plasma membranes, and therefore their receptors are inside the cell, either in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus. In most cases, the complex formed by the lipid-soluble hormone and its receptor acts by altering gene expression in the cell, as described in Chapter 15. Water-soluble hormones cannot readily pass through plasma membranes, and their receptors are on the cell surface. Water-soluble hormones include peptides such as the hypothalamic releasing hormones, proteins such as insulin and glucagon, and some other kinds of molecules, such as epinephrine and norepinephrine. The cell surface receptors of water-soluble hormones are large glycoprotein complexes with three domains: a binding domain projecting beyond the outside of the plasma membrane, a transmembrane domain that anchors the receptor in the membrane, and a catalytic domain that extends into the cytoplasm of the cell. The catalytic domain initiates cell responses by directly or indirectly activating protein kinases or protein phosphatases. In the direct pathway, the catalytic domain changes its shape and becomes capable of phosphorylating tyrosine residues on protein kinases or phosphatases, thus changing their enzymatic activities. In the indirect pathway, the catalytic domain stimulates one of the several second messenger pathways that were described in Chapter 15.41.4.3 Regulation of hormone receptors controls sensitivity of cells to hormones 729We learned above that the release of hormones can be under feedback control, usually negative feedback control. Similarly, the abundance of receptors for a hormone can be under feedback control. In some cases, continuous high levels of a hormone can decrease the number of its receptors, in a process known as downregulation. An example of downregulation is type II diabetes mellitus, also called insulin-independent diabetes, or sometimes adult-onset diabetes, because it occurs more frequently in adulthood than does type I diabetes mellitus, which is due to a lack of insulin and is usually diagnosed in childhood. Type II diabetes is distinguished by elevated levels of circulating insulin, but a loss of receptors. Although genetic factors are likely to be involved, a possible immediate cause of the disease is an overstimulation of pancreatic release of insulin by excessive carbohydrate intake, which leads to downregulation of the insulin receptors. Upregulation of receptors is a positive feedback mechanism, and is less common. One example, however, is the monthly ovarian cycle of human females, whereby an ovum matures and is released. As we will learn in the next chapter, the maturation of the ovum and its associated cells is under the control of FSH. Early in this process, FSH causes the cells associated with the ovum to increase their production of FSH receptors. This upregulation of FSH receptors accelerates the maturation process stimulated by FSH.41.4.4 Responses to hormones can vary greatly 729So far in this chapter we have discussed two mechanisms for regulating physiological responses to hormones: controlling the amount of hormone released and controlling the availability of receptors. There are many other factors that can influence physiological responses to hormones; therefore, it is valuable to be able to characterize these responses. One way is to construct a dose-response curve. To create such a curve, cells, tissues, organs, or even a whole animal are experimentally treated with different amounts of a hormone and the response is measured. The response is then plotted on the y axis of a graph, and the amount of the hormone used is plotted on the x axis. The resulting dose-response curve shows the threshold dose of the hormone necessary to get a response and the dose of the hormone that produces the maximum response. Between these two extreme values, the curve frequently has a sigmoid or S shape. The hormone dose that stimulates half the maximum response indicates the sensitivity of the cell, tissue, organ, or animal to the hormone.Anything that changes the responsiveness of a system to a hormone is reflected in the dose-response curve. A change in the number of receptors in the responding cells, for example, can result in changes in threshold and in sensitivity. Changes in signaling pathways, rate-limiting enzymes, or the availability of substrates or cofactors can result in changes in the maximum response. Dose-response curves are valuable tools for studying the many factors that influence hormone-mediated processes. Responses to hormones can also vary in their time course. Hormones are not simple on-off switches, and the time course over which it acts is an important characteristic of a hormone. This characteristic can be measured by the hormone's half-life in the blood. Soon after endocrine cells are stimulated to secrete their hormone, the hormone reaches its maximum concentration in the blood. By taking subsequent blood samples, researchers can determine how long it takes for the circulating hormone to drop to half of that maximum concentration. The fight-or-flight response to epinephrine is relatively quick in its onset and termination, and the half-life of epinephrine in the blood is only 1 to 3 minutes. The actions of other hormones, such as cortisol or thyroxine, are expressed over much longer periods, and their half-lives are on the order of days.Once a hormone has been released, its half-life is partially determined by processes of degradation and elimination. Hormones are enzymatically degraded in the liver, then they are removed from the blood in the kidney and excreted in the urine. The presence of hormones in the urine is the reason that urine samples can provide important information in clinical tests. In addition, most hormones are taken up and degraded by the very cells on which they act, so that they are not available to continually activate receptors. Another factor that influences the half-life of a hormone is its ability to leave the blood. Some hormones, such as epinephrine, circulate as free molecules, but many circulate bound to carrier proteins. The extent to which hormones are bound to carrier proteins limits their ability to diffuse out of the blood to reach their target cells, to be degraded in the liver, or to be excreted by the kidney. For example, when the mineralocorticoid aldosterone is released, about 15 percent of it binds to carrier proteins, and its half-life is 25 minutes. In contrast, when thyroxine is released, almost 100 percent of it binds to carrier proteins, and thyroxine has a half-life of 6 days. This variation in the time course of hormone responsiveness allows hormone signaling systems to have temporal characteristics that match their functions. Of course, the nature of the target cell response to a hormone is also a factor in determining the time course of hormone action. For a hormone that stimulates a developmental effect, the time course of hormone action can be months, years, and even a lifetime. A very good example of a long-term process regulated primarily by hormones is animal reproduction, the topic of the next chapter.42 Animal ReproductionNatural selection has created some amazing and bizarre adaptations, but among the most unusual and diverse are the methods some animals use to reproduce. Just as "unmanned" submersibles are used in deep ocean exploration, some species of polychaete worms use "unwormed submersibles" to reproduce.The adults of these marine worms live in burrows on the ocean floor or in reefs. Predators make it  dangerous for them to leave their burrows to seek a mate, and if they simply released their eggs and sperm at the mouth of the burrow, they would have a poor chance of successful fertilization. So both males and females develop specialized body segments that which form at the worm's posterior end and become stuffed with sperm or eggs. These segments develop sensory organs but no mouth or gut, since they will not need to feed.When the time is right-full moon for some species, new moon for others-these "sex-cell transporters" break loose from the main body of the worm, leave the burrow, swim up into the water column, swarm with more of their kind, and release their sperm or eggs. The sex-cell transporters die soon after they release their cargo. Union of sperm and eggs takes place in the water column, and fertilized eggs may drift a long way before they descend to the ocean floor and take up life as adult worms.But in many places, the native people know when and where the sex-cell transporters will swarm, and people harvest them for food.In this chapter you will learn how animals reproduce. We first examine asexual mechanisms of reproduction, in which only a single parent is involved, and then turn to sexual reproduction, which requires two parents. Sexually reproducing organisms produce haploid sex cells-sperm and eggs-through the process of meiosis. An egg and a sperm must unite through the process of fertilization to create a new diploid individual.As we will see, much of the diversity in reproductive systems is in mechanisms for getting sperm and eggs together. Although the diversity in reproductive systems is so interesting, we only touch upon it before focusing most or our attention on the anatomy, function, and endocrine control of the human reproductive system. This information will allow us to understand the technologies we use to limit fertility and to treat infertility. We end the chapter with a discussion of sexual health and sexually transmitted diseases. 42.1 Asexual Reproduction 732Sexual reproduction is a nearly universal trait of animals, although many species can reproduce asexually as well. Offspring produced asexually are genetically identical to one another and to their parents. Asexual reproduction is highly efficient because there is no mating. Mating requires energy, involves risks, and requires that resources be devoted to a large population of males, who do not produce offspring themselves. Asexual populations can use resources efficiently because all individuals in the population can convert resources to offspring. However, asexual reproduction does not generate genetic diversity, and this can be a disadvantage in changing environments. As we learned in Chapter 21, genetic diversity enables natural selection to shape adaptations in response to environmental change.A variety of species, mostly invertebrates, reproduce asexually. They tend to be species that are sessile and cannot search for mates, or species that live in sparse populations and rarely encounter potential mates. Furthermore, asexually reproducing species are likely to be found in relatively constant environments, in which the potential for rapid evolutionary change is not as important as in more variable environments.There are three common modes of asexual reproduction:Budding, in which new individuals form by mitotic cell division.Regeneration, in which a piece or section of an organism can generate an entire new individual.Parthenogenesis, in which individuals develop from unfertilized eggs.42.1.1 Budding and regeneration produce new individuals by mitosis 733Many simple multicellular animals produce offspring by budding; new individuals form as outgrowths of the bodies of older animals. These buds grow by mitotic cell division, and the cells differentiate before the buds break away from the parent. The bud is genetically identical to the parent, and it may grow as large as the parent before it becomes independent.Regeneration is usually thought of as the replacement of damaged tissues or lost limbs, but in some cases pieces of an organism can regenerate complete individuals. In a classic experiment demonstrating regeneration, a sponge is pushed through a cloth mesh, producing many little clusters of cells. Each cluster grows into a small but complete sponge. The ability of sponges to regenerate was used off the coast of Florida to restore the commercial bath-sponge fishery, which was endangered by overfishing. Echinoderms also have remarkable abilities to regenerate. If sea stars are cut into pieces, each piece that includes a portion of the central disc grows into a new animal. Regeneration frequently results when an animal is broken by an outside force. A storm, for example, can cause a heavy surf that breaks colonial cnidarians such as corals. Pieces broken off the colony can regenerate into new colonies. In some species the breakage occurs in the absence of external forces. Some species of segmented marine worms related to the ones we discussed at the beginning of this chapter develop segments with rudimentary heads bearing sensory organs, then break apart. Each fragmented segment forms a new worm.42.1.2 Parthenogenesis is the development of unfertilized eggs 733Not all eggs have to be fertilized to develop. A common mode of asexual reproduction in arthropods is the development of offspring from unfertilized eggs. This phenomenon, called parthenogenesis, also occurs in some species of fish, amphibians, and reptiles. Most species that reproduce parthenogenetically also engage in sexual reproduction or sexual behavior. The aphids that can rapidly populate your rosebushes in the spring and summer reproduce parthenogenetically while conditions are favorable. Some of the unfertilized eggs laid in spring and summer develop into male aphids, others into females. As conditions become less favorable, the aphids mate, and the females lay fertilized eggs. These eggs do not hatch until the following spring, and they yield only females.In some species, parthenogenesis is part of the mechanism that determines sex. For example, in many hymenopterans (ants, and most species of bees and wasps), males develop from unfertilized eggs and are haploid. Females develop from fertilized eggs and are diploid. Most females are sterile workers, but a select few become fertile queens. After a queen mates, she has a supply of sperm that she controls, enabling her to produce either fertilized or unfertilized eggs. Thus the queen determines when and how much of the colony resources are expended on males. Parthenogenetic reproduction in some species requires sexual activity even though this activity does not fertilize eggs. The eggs of parthenogenetically reproducing ticks and mites, for example, develop only after the animals have mated, even though the eggs remain unfertilized. One case that has been investigated by David Crews and his students at the University of Texas is parthenogenetic reproduction in a species of whiptail lizard. There are no males in this species, but females act as males, engaging in all aspects of courtship display and mating, even though no sperm are produced or transferred. Whether a specific female acts as a female or as a male depends on her hormonal state at the time, but sexual activity is required to stimulate ovulation.42.2 Sexual Reproduction 734A large portion of the time and energy budgets of sexually reproducing animals goes into sexual behavior, which exposes them to predation, can result in physical damage, and detracts from other useful activities such as feeding, building secure living places, and caring for existing offspring. In spite of all of these disadvantages, there is an overwhelming evolutionary advantage to sexual reproduction: It produces genetic diversity. Sexual reproduction requires the joining of two haploid sex cells to form a diploid individual. These haploid cells, or gametes, are produced through gametogenesis, a process that involves meiotic cell divisions. Two events in meiosis contribute to genetic diversity: crossing over of homologous chromosomes, and the independent assortment of chromosomes. Both of these genetic phenomena were described in Chapter 10.Mating behavior also contributes to genetic diversity in sexually reproducing species. The genetic variation in the gametes of a single individual and the genetic variation between any two parents produce an enormous potential for genetic variation between any two offspring of a sexually reproducing pair of individuals. This genetic diversity is the raw material for natural selection; thus evolutionary change in sexually reproducing animals can be quite rapid.There are three fundamental phenomena of sexual reproduction in animals: Gametogenesis (making sex cells); Mating (getting sex cells together); Fertilization (getting sex cells to fuse). There is not a great deal of diversity in gametogenesis when we compare different groups of animals. Processes of fertilization are also rather similar in widely different species. Therefore, although the discussion of gametogenesis that follows is primarily derived from information from mammals, the facts would not be terribly different if we focused on a different group of animals. Mating, on the other hand, shows incredible evolutionary diversity. Our discussion of mating in this chapter will focus on a few specific examples as representative of the fascinating diversity that exists.42.2.1 Eggs and sperm form through gametogenesis 734Gametogenesis occurs in the primary sex organs, the gonads, which are testes (singular testis) in males and ovaries in females. The tiny gametes of males, called sperm, are mobile and move by beating their flagella. The much larger female gametes are eggs, or ova (singular ovum), and are nonmotile. Gametes are produced from germ cells, which have their origin in the earliest cell divisions of the embryo and remain distinct from the rest of the body. All the rest of the cells of the embryo are called somatic cells. Germ cells are sequestered in the body of the embryo until its gonads begin to form, The germ cells then migrate to the gonads, where they take up residence and proliferate by mitosis, producing oogonia (singular oogonium) in females and spermatogonia (singular spermatogonium) in males. Oogonia and spermatogonia, which are diploid, multiply by mitosis in turn, eventually producing primary oocytes and primary spermatocytes, which are still diploid cells. Meiosis, the next step in gametogenesis, reduces the chromosomes to the haploid number, and these haploid cells mature into sperm and ova. (You may want to review the discussion of meiosis in Chapter 9 before reading further.) Although the steps of meiosis are very similar in males and females, there are some significant differences in gametogenesis.Primary spermatocytes undergo the first meiotic division to form secondary spermatocytes, which are haploid. The second meiotic division produces four haploid spermatids for each primary spermatocyte that entered meiosis. In mammals, these cells remain connected by cross-bridges of cytoplasm after each division. The reason that mammalian spermatocytes remain in cytoplasmic contact throughout their development probably is the asymmetry of sex chromosomes in the males of most species. Half of the secondary spermatocytes receive an X chromosome, the other half a Y chromosome. The Y chromosome contains fewer genes than the X chromosome, and apparently some of the products of genes not included in the Y chromosome are essential for spermatocyte development. By remaining in cytoplasmic contact, all spermatocytes can share the gene products of the X chromosomes, even though only half of them have an X chromosome. Just after being produced by meiosis, a spermatid bears little resemblance to a sperm. Through further differentiation, it will become compact, streamlined, and motile. We will look at the differentiation of human sperm in more detail below.Oogonia, like spermatogonia, proliferate through mitosis. The resulting egg precursor cells differentiate into primary oocytes, which immediately enter prophase of the first meiotic division. In many species, including humans, the development of the oocyte is arrested at this point, and may remain so for days, months, or years. In contrast, there is no arrest in the development of male gametes; the process goes steadily to completion once the primary spermatocyte has differentiated. In the human female, as we will see, some primary oocytes may remain in arrested prophase I for 50 years! During this prolonged prophase I, or shortly before it ends, the primary oocyte undergoes its major growth phase. It grows larger due to increased production of ribosomes, RNA, cytoplasmic organelles, and energy stores. At this time, the primary oocyte acquires all of the energy, raw materials, and RNA that the egg will need to survive its first cell divisions after fertilization. In fact, the nutrients in the egg will have to nourish the embryo until it is either nourished by the maternal system or can feed on its own. When a primary oocyte resumes meiosis, its nucleus completes the first meiotic division near the surface of the cell. The daughter cells of this division receive grossly unequal shares of cytoplasm. This asymmetry represents another major difference from spermatogenesis, in which cell divisions apportion cytoplasm equally. The daughter cell that receives almost all of the cytoplasm becomes the secondary oocyte, and the one that receives almost none forms the first polar body.The second meiotic division of the large secondary oocyte is also accompanied by an asymmetrical division of the cytoplasm. One daughter cell forms the large, haploid ootid, which eventually differentiates into a mature ovum, and the other forms the second polar body. Polar bodies eventually degenerate, so the end result of oogenesis is that each primary oocyte produces only one mature egg. However, that egg is a very large, well-provisioned cell. A second period of arrested development occurs after the first meiotic division forms the secondary oocyte. The egg may be expelled from the ovary in this condition. In many species, including humans, the second meiotic division is not completed until the egg is fertilized by a sperm.42.2.2 A single body can function as both male and female 736Sexual reproduction requires both male and female haploid gametes. In most species, these gametes are produced by individuals that are either male or female. Species that have male and female members are called dioecious (from the Greek for "two houses"). In some species, a single individual may possess both female and male reproductive systems. Such species are called monoecious ("one house") or hermaphroditic. Almost all invertebrate groups have hermaphroditic species. An earthworm is an example of a simultaneous hermaphrodite, meaning that it is both male and female at the same time. When two earthworms mate, they exchange sperm, and as a result, the eggs of each are fertilized. Some animals are sequential hermaphrodites, meaning that individuals function as a male or as a female at different times in their lives.What is the selective advantage of hermaphroditism? Some simultaneous hermaphrodites have a low probability of meeting a potential mate. An example is a parasitic tapeworm. Even though it may be large and cause lots of trouble for its host, it may be the only tapeworm in the host. Tapeworms can fertilize their own eggs. Most simultaneous hermaphrodites must mate with another individual, but since each member of the population is both male and female, the probability of encountering a possible mate is double what it would be in monoecious species. Sequential hermaphroditism can reduce the possibility of inbreeding among siblings by making them all the same sex at the same time and therefore incapable of mating with one another. In a species in which only a few males fertilize all females, sequential hermaphroditism can maximize reproductive success by making it possible for an individual to reproduce as a female until the opportunity arises for it to function successfully as a male.Anatomical and behavioral adaptations bring eggs and sperm together 736Sexual reproduction requires that two haploid gametes join togetherto form a diploid zygote. The purpose of mating behavior is to get eggs and sperm close enough together that this process-called fertilization-can occur. Many anatomical and behavioral adaptations have evolved to support mating. The simplest distinction in mating systems is whether fertilization occurs externally or internally. In an aquatic environment, animals can simply release their gametes into the water. External fertilization is common among simple aquatic animals that are not very mobile. These animals produce huge numbers of gametes. A female oyster, for example, may produce 100 million eggs in a year, and the number of sperm produced by a male oyster is astronomical. But numbers alone do not guarantee that gametes will meet. Timing is also important. The reproductive activities of the males and females of a population must be synchronized. Seasonal breeders may use day length, changes in temperature, or changes in weather to time their production and release of gametes. Social stimulation is also important. Sexual activity on the part of one member of a population can stimulate others to engage in mating.Behavior can play an important role in bringing gametes together even when fertilization is external. Many species travel great distances to congregate with potential mates and release their gametes at the same time in a suitable environment. Salmon are an extreme example, traveling thousands of miles to spawn in the stream where they hatched. Sperm can swim only through water, and delicate gametes released into air would dry out and die. Terrestrial animals avoid these problems by engaging in internal fertilization. Animals have evolved an incredible diversity of behavioral and anatomical adaptations toget male gametes into the female reproductive tract. As we saw above, gametogenesis occurs in the primary sex organs, the gonads. All of the additional anatomical components of an animal's reproductive system are called accessory sex organs. An obvious accessory sex organ in the male is a tubular structure called the penis, which enables the male to deposit sperm in the female's accessory sex organ, the vagina (or, in some species, the cloaca, a cavity common to the digestive, urinary, and reproductive systems). Accessory sex organs include a variety of glands, tubules, ducts, and other structures.Copulation is the physical joining of the male and female accessory sex organs. Transfer of sperm in internal fertilization can also be indirect. Males of some species of mites and scorpions (among the arthropods) and salamanders (among the vertebrates) deposit spermatophores-containers filled with sperm-in the environment. When a female mite finds a spermatophore, she straddles it and opens a pair of plates in her abdomen so that the tip of the spermatophore enters her reproductive tract and allows the sperm to enter. Some female salamanders use the lips of their cloacae to scoop up the spermatophore. Male squid and spiders play a more active role in spermatophore transfer. The male spider secretes a drop containing sperm onto a bit of web; then, with a special structure on his foreleg, he picks up the sperm-containing web and inserts it through the female's genital opening. Male squid use one special tentacle to pick up a spermatophore and insert it into the female's genital opening. Most male insects copulate and transfer sperm to the female's vagina through a tubular penis. The genitalia-external sex organs-of insects often have species-specific shapes that match in a lock-and-key fashion. This mechanism ensures a tight, secure fit between the mating pair during the prolonged period of sperm transfer. The males of some insect species have elaborate structures on their penises that can scoop sperm deposited by other males out the female's reproductive tract.42.2.3 The evolution of vertebrate reproductive systems parallels the move to land 737The earliest vertebrates evolved in aquatic environments. The closest living relatives of those earliest vertebrates are modern-day fishes. They remain exclusively aquatic animals, and most practice external fertilization. The most primitive of the fishes, the lampreys and hagfishes, broadcast their gametes into the environment, as do many aquatic invertebrates. In most fishes, however, fertilization is more selective: Mating behaviors bring females and males into close proximity at the time of gamete release. In some sharks and rays, certain fins have evolved into structures that hold the male and female together and enable sperm to be transferred directly into the female reproductive tract. This internal fertilization in sharks and rays has made it possible for the females of some species to enclose fertilized eggs in protective egg cases before depositing them in the environment.Amphibians were the first vertebrates to live in terrestrial environments. They dealt with the challenge of a dry environment by returning to water to reproduce, as most amphibians still do today. Exceptions are the terrestrial salamanders that use spermatophores to transfer sperm, as mentioned earlier. The spermatophore provides a protective, non-desiccating environment for the sperm. Other amphibians, like most fishes, rely on sexual behavior to bring eggs and sperm together. Frog mating behavior is characterized by amplexus, a behavior in which a male grasps a female around the middle with his forelegs and holds on until she releases her egg mass, at which time he releases his sperm.Reptiles were the first vertebrate group to solve the problem of reproduction in the terrestrial environment. Their solution, the shelled egg, is shared by birds. But the shelled egg created a new problem for fertilization: Sperm cannot penetrate the shell, so they have to reach the egg before the shell forms. Hence the need for internal fertilization and the evolution of the necessary accessory sex organs. Male snakes and lizards have paired hemipenes, which can be filled with blood and thereby extruded from the male's cloaca to form intromittent organs. Only one hemipene is inserted in the female's cloaca at a time. It is usually rough or spiny at the end to achieve a secure hold while sperm are transferred down a groove on its surface. Retractor muscles pull the hemipene back into the male's body when mating is completed. Birds have erectile penises that channel sperm along a groove into the female cloaca. All mammals use internal fertilization, but except for the monotremes, they have done away with the shelled egg. They keep the developing embryo in the female reproductive tract, at least through the early stages of development. Mammalian species differ enormously as to the developmental stage of the offspring at the time of birth.42.2.4 Reproductive systems are distinguished by where the embryo develops 738Two patterns of care and nurture of the embryo have evolved in animals: oviparity (egg bearing) and viviparity (live bearing). Oviparous animals lay eggs in the environment, and their embryos develop outside the mother's body. Oviparity is possible because eggs are stocked with abundant nutrients to supply the needs of the embryo. Oviparous terrestrial animals such as insects, reptiles, and birds protect their eggs from desiccation with tough, waterproof membranes or shells. However, these egg coverings must be permeable to oxygen and carbon dioxide. Some oviparous animals engage in various forms of parental behavior to protect their eggs, but until the eggs hatch, the embryos depend entirely on the nutrients stored in the egg. The only oviparous mammalian species are the monotremes: the echidnas and the duck-billed platypus.Viviparous animals retain the embryo within the mother's body during its early developmental stages. Most mammals are viviparous. There are examples of viviparity in all other vertebrate groups except the crocodiles, turtles, and birds. Even some sharks retain fertilized eggs in their bodies and give birth to free-living offspring. But there is a big difference between viviparity in mammals and in other species. Mammals (except monotremes) have a specialized portion of the female reproductive tract, the uterus, that holds the embryo and enables it to derive nutrients from and deliver wastes to the maternal blood. In contrast, nonmammalian viviparous animals simply retain the fertilized eggs in the mother's body until they hatch. The embryos still receive their nutrition from the stores in the egg, so this reproductive adaptation is called ovoviviparity. Among mammals there are various degrees of uterine adaptation. In marsupials, such as kangaroos and koalas, the uterus simply holds the embryo and has a limited capability for exchanging nutrients and wastes. Marsupials are born at a very early developmental stage, crawl into a pouch called a marsupium on the mother's belly, attach to a nipple, and complete development outside of the mother's uterus. Mammals other than monotremes and marsupials are called eutherians. They are characterized by an intimate association of the blood supplies of mother and embryo in the walls of the uterus. We will now look at the reproductive system of eutherians in greater depth, using Homo sapiens as our model.42.3 The Human Reproductive System 739So far we have seen a small sampling of the fascinating diversity of animal reproductive systems. In this section we describe the structures and functions of the male and female sex organs in eutherian mammals, specifically in human beings, and discuss hormonal regulation of both male and female systems.42.3.1 Male sex organs produce and deliver semen 739Semen is the product of the male reproductive system. Besides sperm, semen contains a complex mixture of fluids and molecules that support the sperm and facilitate fertilization. Sperm make up less than five percent of the volume of the semen. Sperm are produced in the testes, the paired male gonads. In all mammals except bats, elephants, and marine mammals, the testes are located outside the body cavity in a pouch of skin, the scrotum. The optimal temperature for spermatogenesis in most mammals is slightly lower than the normal body temperature. The scrotum keeps the testes at this optimal temperature. Muscles in the scrotum contract in a cold environment, bringing the testes closer to the warmth of the body; in a hot environment they relax, suspending the testes farther from the body. A testis consists of tightly coiled seminiferous tubules within which spermatogenesis takes place. Each tubule is lined with a stratified epithelium. Spermatogonia reside in the outer layers of this epithelium, and moving from these outer layers toward the lumen of the tubule, we find germ cells in successive stages of spermatogenesis. These germ cells are intimately associated with Sertoli cells, which protect them by providing a barrier between them and any noxious substances that might be circulating in the blood. Sertoli cells also provide nutrients for the developing sperm and are involved in the hormonal control of spermatogenesis. Between the seminiferous tubules are clusters of Leydig cells, which produce male sex hormones.With completion of the second meiotic division, each primary spermatocyte has given rise to four spermatids, which develop into sperm as they continue to migrate toward the lumen of the seminiferous tubule. The nucleus in what will become the head of the sperm becomes compact, and the surrounding cytoplasm is lost. A flagellum, or tail, develops. The mitochondria, which will provide energy for tail motility, become condensed into a midpiece between the head and the tail. A cap, called an acrosome, forms over the nucleus in the head of the sperm. The acrosome contains enzymes that enable the sperm to digest a path through protective layers surrounding the egg. Fully differentiated sperm are shed into the lumen of the seminiferous tubule. From the tubules, sperm move into a storage structure called the epididymis, where they mature and become motile. The epididymis connects to the urethra by a tube called the vas deferens (plural vasa deferentia). The urethra originates in the bladder, runs through the penis, and opens to the outside of the body at the tip of the penis. It serves as the common duct for the urinary and reproductive systems.The penis and the scrotum are the male genitalia. The shaft of the penis is covered with normal skin, but the tip, or glans penis, is covered with thinner, more sensitive skin that is especially responsive to sexual stimulation. A fold of skin called the foreskin covers the glans of the human penis. The cultural practice of circumcision removes a portion of the foreskin. The penis becomes hard and erect during sexual arousal, facilitating its insertion into the female's vagina. Erections occur when the autonomic nervous system causes dilation of the vessels carrying blood into the penis. This increased blood flow fills and swells shafts of spongy, erectile tissue located along the length of the penis. The enlargement of these blood-filled cavities compresses the vessels that normally carry blood out of the penis. As a result, the erectile tissue becomes more and more engorged with blood. At the height of sexual stimulation the autonomic nervous system switches signaling and causes the vessels leading into the penis to constrict. The resulting decrease in blood pressure in the erectile tissue relieves the compression of the blood vessels leaving the penis, and the erection declines. In some species of mammals-but not humans-the penis contains a bone called the baculum or the os penis; however, even those species depend on erectile tissue for copulation.The components of the semen other than sperm come from several accessory glands that contribute secretions to the urethra. A relatively small volume of fluid comes from the bulbourethral glands. This alkaline and mucoid secretion precedes other secretions; it neutralizes acidity in the urethra and lubricates the tip of the penis. About two-thirds of the volume of semen is seminal fluid, which comes from the seminal vesicles. Seminal fluid is thick because it contains mucus and protein. It also contains fructose, an energy source for the sperm, which are too small to carry much of their own fuel. Semen also carries a message for the female reproductive tract in the form of chemicals called prostaglandins. Prostaglandins stimulate rhythmic contractions in the female reproductive tract that help move the sperm up into the regions where fertilization can take place. One-fourth to one-third of the volume of semen is a thin, milky fluid that comes from the prostate gland. Prostate fluid makes the uterine environment more hospitable to sperm. The prostate also secretes a clotting enzyme that works on the protein in seminal fluid to convert semen into a gelatinous mass. The prostate gland completely surrounds the urethra as it leaves the bladder. This gland tends to enlarge in men over 40 years of age, creating a condition known as benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH). A seriously enlarged prostate can block the urethra and make urination difficult. Unrelated to BPH, prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men. It is relatively easy to diagnose, however, and is highly curable if detected early.The culmination of the male sex act propels semen through the vasa deferentia and the urethra in two steps, emission and ejaculation. During emission, rhythmic contractions of the smooth muscles of the ducts containing sperm and of the accessory glands move sperm and the various secretions into the urethra at the base of the penis. Ejaculation, which follows emission, is caused by contractions of other muscles at the base of the penis surrounding the urethra. The rigidity of the erect penis allows these contractions to force the gelatinous mass of semen through the urethra and out of the body.42.3.2 Male sexual function is controlled by hormones 741Spermatogenesis and maintenance of male secondary sexual characteristics depend on testosterone, which is produced by Leydig cells in the testes. In Chapter 41 we learned that increased production of testosterone at the time of puberty is due to an increased release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) by the hypothalamus, which in turn stimulates cells in the anterior pituitary to increase their secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Negative feedback loops help to regulate testis functions. The Leydig cells are stimulated by LH to produce testosterone. The rise in the level of testosterone in the prepubertal male causes the development of secondary sexual characteristics and the pubertal growth spurt, promotes increased muscle mass, and stimulates growth and maturation of the testes. If a male is castrated (has his testes removed) before puberty, he will not develop a deep voice, typical patterns of body hair, or a muscular build, and his external genitalia will remain childlike. Continued production of testosterone after puberty is essential to maintain secondary sexual characteristics and to produce sperm. Spermatogenesis is controlled by the influence of FSH and testosterone on Sertoli cells in the seminiferous tubules.42.3.3 Female sex organs produce eggs, receive sperm, and nurture the embryo 741When an egg matures, it is released from the ovary directly into the body cavity. But the egg can't go far. Each ovary is enveloped by the undulating, fringed opening of an oviduct (also known as a fallopian tube), which sweeps the egg into the tube. Cilia lining the oviduct propel the egg slowly toward the uterus, or womb, which is a muscular, thick-walled cavity shaped like an upside-down pear. The uterus is where the embryo develops if the egg is fertilized. At the bottom of the uterus is an opening called the cervix, which leads into the vagina. Sperm are ejaculated into the vagina during copulation, and the fetus passes through the vagina during birth.Two sets of skin folds surround the opening of the vagina and the opening of the urethra, through which urine passes. The inner, more delicate folds are the labia minora (singular labium minus); the outer, thicker folds are the labia majora (singular labium majus). At the anterior tip of the labia minora is the clitoris, a small bulb of erectile tissue that is the anatomical homolog of the penis. The clitoris is highly sensitive and plays an important role in sexual response. The labia minora and the clitoris become engorged with blood in response to sexual stimulation. The opening of an infant female's vagina is partly covered by a thin membrane, the hymen. Eventually the hymen becomes ruptured by vigorous physical activity or first sexual intercourse; it can sometimes make first intercourse difficult or painful for the female. To fertilize an egg, sperm swim and are propelled by contractions of the female reproductive tract up from the vagina, through the cervix, the uterus, and most of the oviduct. The egg is fertilized in the upper region of the oviduct. Fertilization stimulates the completion of the second meiotic division, after which the haploid nuclei of the sperm and the egg can fuse to produce a diploid zygote nucleus. Still in the oviduct, the zygote undergoes its first few cell divisions to become a blastocyst, which continues to move down the oviduct. When the blastocyst reaches the uterus, it attaches itself to the epithelial lining of the uterus, the endometrium. The endometrium and the underlying cells of the uterine wall are stimulated by estrogen to proliferate and grow many new blood vessels in anticipation of receiving a blastocyst.Once attached to the endometrium, the blastocyst burrows into it, in a process called implantation, and interacts with it to form a structure called the placenta. The placenta exchanges nutrients and waste products between the mother's blood and the baby's blood. If a blastocyst does not arrive in the uterus, the endometrium regresses or is sloughed off. Thus, the female reproductive cycle actually consists of two linked cycles: an ovarian cycle that produces eggs and hormones, and a uterine cycle that creates an appropriate environment for the embryo should fertilization occur.42.3.4 The ovarian cycle produces a mature egg 742An ovarian cycle is about 28 days long in the human female,* but there is considerable variation among individuals. During the first half of the cycle, at least one primary oocyte matures into a secondary oocyte (egg) and is expelled from the ovary. During the second half of the cycle, cells in the ovary that were associated with the maturing oocyte develop endocrine functions and then regress if the egg is not fertilized. *Some mammals have ovarian cycles shorter than 28 days, others have longer ones. Rats and mice have ovarian cycles of about 4 days; many seasonally breeding mammals have only one ovarian cycle per year. At birth, a human female has about a million primary oocytes in each ovary. By the time she reaches sexual maturity, she has only about 200,000; the rest have degenerated. During a woman's fertile years, her ovaries will go through about 450 ovarian cycles, and during each of these cycles one oocyte will mature and be released. At about 50 years of age, she reaches menopause, the end of fertility, and may have only a few oocytes left in each ovary. Throughout a woman's life, oocytes are degenerating, and no new ones are produced.Each primary oocyte in the ovary is surrounded by a layer of follicle cells. An oocyte and its follicle cells constitute the functional unit of the ovary, the follicle. Between puberty and menopause, six to twelve follicles begin to mature each month. In each of these follicles, the oocyte enlarges and the surrounding cells proliferate. After about a week, one of these follicles is larger than the rest and continues to grow, while the others cease to develop and shrink. In the enlarged follicle, the follicle cells nurture the growing egg, supplying it with nutrients and with macromolecules and proteins that it will use in early stages of development if it is fertilized. After 2 weeks of follicular growth, ovulation occurs: the follicle ruptures, and the egg is released. Following ovulation, the follicle cells continue to proliferate and form a mass of endocrine tissue about the size of a marble. This structure, which remains in the ovary, is the corpus luteum (plural corpora lutea). It functions as an endocrine gland, producing estrogen and progesterone for about 2 weeks. It then degenerates unless the egg is fertilized.42.3.5 The uterine cycle prepares an environment for the fertilized egg 743The uterine cycle of human females parallels the ovarian cycle, and consists first of a buildup and then of a breakdown of the endometrium, or uterine lining. About 5 days into the ovarian cycle, the endometrium starts to grow in preparation for receiving a blastocyst. The uterus attains its maximum state of preparedness about 5 days after ovulation and remains in that state for about another 9 days. If a blastocyst has not arrived by that time, the endometrium begins to break down, slough off, and flow from the body through the vagina-the process of menstruation (from menses, the Latin word for "months"). The uterine cycles of mammals other than humans do not include menstruation; instead, the uterine lining is resorbed. In these species the most obvious correlate of the ovarian cycle is a state of sexual receptivity called estrus around the time of ovulation. When the female comes into estrus, or "heat," she actively solicits male attention and may be aggressive to other females. The human female is unusual among mammals in that she is potentially sexually receptive throughout her ovarian cycle and at all seasons of the year.42.3.6 Hormones control and coordinate the ovarian and uterine cycles 743The ovarian and uterine cycles of human females are coordinated and timed by the same hormones that initiate sexual maturation. Gonadotropins secreted by the anterior pituitary are the central elements of this control. Before puberty (that is, before about 11 years of age), the secretion of gonadotropins is low, and the ovaries are inactive. At puberty, the hypothalamus increases its release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), thus stimulating the anterior pituitary to secrete follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). In response to FSH and LH, ovarian tissue grows and produces estrogen. The rise in estrogen causes the development of female secondary sexual characteristics, including growth of the uterus. Between puberty and menopause, interactions of gonadotropin-releasing hormone, gonadotropins, and sex steroids control the ovarian and uterine cycles.Menstruation marks the beginning of the uterine and ovarian cycles. A few days before menstruation begins, the anterior pituitary begins to increase its secretion of FSH and LH. In response, some follicles begin to mature in the ovaries, and follicle cells gradually increase production of estrogen. After about a week of growth, usually all but one of these follicles wither away. Occasionally more than one follicle continues to develop, making it possible for the woman to bear fraternal (nonidentical) twins. The follicle that is still growing secretes increasing amounts of estrogen, stimulating the endometrium to grow. Estrogen exerts negative feedback control on gonadotropin release by the anterior pituitary during the first 12 days of the ovarian cycle. Then, on about day 12, estrogen exerts positive rather than negative feedback control on the pituitary. As a result, there is a surge of LH, and a lesser surge of FSH. The LH surge triggers the mature follicle to rupture and release its egg, and it stimulates follicle cells to develop into the corpus luteum and to secrete estrogen and progesterone.Estrogen and especially progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum following ovulation are crucial to the continued growth and maintenance of the endometrium. In addition, these sex steroids exert negative feedback control on the pituitary, inhibiting gonadotropin release and thus preventing new follicles from beginning to mature. If the egg is not fertilized, the corpus luteum degenerates on about day 26 of the cycle. Without the production of progesterone by the corpus luteum, the endometrium sloughs off, and menstruation occurs. The decrease in circulating steroids also releases the hypothalamus and pituitary from negative feedback control, so GnRH, FSH, and LH all increase. The increase in these hormones induces the next round of follicle development, and the ovarian cycle begins again. If the egg is fertilized, and a blastocyst arrives in the uterus and implants itself in the endometrium, a new hormone comes into play. A layer of cells covering the blastocyst begins to secrete human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). This gonadotropin, a molecular homolog of LH, keeps the corpus luteum functional. Because hCG is present only in the blood of pregnant women, the presence of this hormone is the basis for pregnancy testing. These tissues derived from the blastocyst also begin to produce estrogen and progesterone, eventually replacing the corpus luteum as the most important source of these sexsteroids. Continued high levels of estrogen and progesterone prevent the pituitary from secreting gonadotropins; thus the ovarian cycle ceases for the duration of the pregnancy. The same mechanism is exploited by birth control pills, which contain synthetic hormones resembling estrogen and progesterone that prevent the ovarian cycle (but not the uterine cycle) by exerting negative feedback control on the hypothalamus and pituitary. 42.4 Human Sexual Behavior 745The organs of the male and female reproductive systems are similar in all eutherians. However, the hormonal and emotional biology of reproductive behavior humans is more complex. The emotional and social complexities that have evolved to such a tremendous degree in humans have affected our reproductive lives, as have our extensive technological achievements. Here we discuss human sexual responses responses and technologies for both contraception (birth control) and enhanced fertility. The chapter closes with a discussion of sexually transmitted diseases.42.4.1 Human sexual responses consist of four phases 745The responses of both women and men to sexual stimulation consist of four phases: excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution. As sexual excitement begins in a woman, her heart rate and blood pressure rise, muscular tension increases, her breasts swell, and her nipples become erect. Her external genitals, including the sensitive clitoris, swell as they become filled with blood, and the walls of the vagina secrete lubricating fluid that facilitates copulation.As a woman's sexual excitement increases, she enters the plateau phase. Her blood pressure and heart rate rise further, her breathing becomes rapid, and the clitoris begins to retract-the greater the excitement, the greater the retraction. The sensitivity that once focused in the clitoris spreads over the external genitals, and the clitoris itself becomes even more sensitive. Orgasm may last as long as a few minutes, and, unlike men, some women can experience several orgasms in rapid succession. During the resolution phase, blood drains from the genitals, and body physiology returns to close to normal.In the male, as in the female, the excitement phase is marked by an increase in blood pressure, heart rate, and muscle tension. The penis fills with blood and becomes hard and erect. In the plateau phase, breathing becomes rapid, the diameter of the glans increases, and a clear lubricating fluid from the bulbourethral glands oozes from the penis. Pressure and friction against the nerve endings in the glans and in the skin along the shaft of the penis eventually trigger orgasm. Massive spasms of the muscles in the genital area and contractions in the accessory reproductive organs result in ejaculation.Within a few minutes after ejaculation, the penis shrinks to its former size, and body physiology returns to resting conditions. The male sexual response includes a refractory period immediately after orgasm. During this period, which may last 20 minutes or more, a man cannot achieve a full erection or another orgasm, regardless of the intensity of sexual stimulation.42.4.2 Humans use a variety of technologies to control fertility 745People use many methods to control the number of their children and the time between their children's births. The are only absolutely sure methods of preventing fertilization and pregnancy: complete abstinence from sexual activity, or surgical removal of the gonads. Since those approaches are not acceptable to most people, they turn to a variety of other methods to prevent pregnancy or conception, which therefore are called methods of contraception.Some methods of contraception are used by the woman, others by the man. They vary from means of blocking gametogenesis to means of blocking development of the embryo. Contraceptive methods vary enormously in their effectiveness and in their acceptability to those who use them. Here we review some of the most common methods and their relative failure rates (Table 42_1).An approach to contraception that does not involve physical or pharmacological technologies is to separate sperm and egg in time through the rhythm method. The couple avoids sex from day 10 to day 20 of the ovarian cycle, when the woman is most likely to be fertile. The cycle can be tracked by use of a calendar, supplemented by the basal body temperature method, which identifies the day of ovulation on the basis of the observation that a woman's body temperature drops on the day of ovulation and rises sharply on the day after. Changes in the stickiness of the cervical mucus also help identify the day of ovulation.However, sperm deposited in the female reproductive tract may remain viable for up to 6 days. Similarly, the ovum remains viable for 2 to 3 days after ovulation. These facts, added to individual variation in the timing of ovulation, result in an annual failure rate of between 15 and 35 percent for the rhythm method. In other words, 15 to 35 percent of women using only the rhythm method for 1 year will become pregnant during that time. Another approach is to try to separate sperm and egg in space through coitus interruptus-withdrawal of the penis before ejaculation. The annual failure rate of this method may be as high as 40 percent.Techniques for placing a physical barrier between egg and sperm have been used for centuries. The condom is a sheath made of an impermeable material such as latex that can be fitted over the erect penis. A condom traps the semen so that sperm do not enter the vagina. Condoms also help prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases such as AIDS, syphilis, and gonorrhea. In theory, the use of a condom can be highly effective, with a failure rate near zero; in practice, the annual failure rate is about 15 percent, because of faulty technique. There is also a female condom, which can be used by the woman to create an impermeable lining of the vagina. The diaphragm is a dome-shaped piece of rubber with a firm rim that fits over the woman's cervix and thus blocks sperm from entering the uterus. Smaller than the diaphragm is the cervical cap, which fits snugly just over the tip of the cervix. Both the diaphragm and the cervical cap are treated first with jelly or cream containing a spermicide-a chemical that kills or incapacitates sperm-and then inserted through the vagina before sexual intercourse. Annual failure rates are about the same as for condoms-about 15 percent.A device simpler than the diaphragm is a circular, highly absorbent, polyurethane sponge permeated with a spermicide. Placed in the upper region of the vagina, the contraceptive sponge blocks, absorbs, and kills sperm. The sponge stays effective for about a day. It is easier to use than the diaphragm and has about the same failure rate. Spermicidal foams, jellies, and creams can be used alone by placing them in the vagina with special applicators. Used in this way, they have an annual failure rate of 25 percent or more. Douching (flushing the vagina with liquid after intercourse), in spite of popular belief, is almost useless as a method of birth control. Remember that sperm can reach the upper regions of the oviducts within 10 minutes after ejaculation.The effectiveness of barrier methods can be greatly improved if different ones are used in combination. For example, if the man uses a condom and the woman a diaphragm, the failure rate is extremely low. The widely used oral contraceptives, or birth control pills, work by preventing ovulation. Their mechanisms of action take advantage of the roles of estrogens and progesterone as negative feedback signals that work on both the hypothalamus and the pituitary to inhibit gonadotropin release. The most common pills contain low doses of synthetic estrogens and synthetic progesterones (progestins). By keeping the circulating levels of gonadotropins low, the birth control pill interferes with the maturation of follicles and ova. The ovarian cycle (but not the uterine cycle) is suspended. The negative side effects of oral contraceptives have been the topic of extensive discussion. These side effects include increased risk of blood clot formation, heart attack, stroke, and breast cancer. However, these side effects are associated mostly with pills containing higher hormone concentrations than are used in modern pills. For pills in use today, the risk of these side effects is low, except for women over 35 years old who smoke, for whom the risk is significantly greater. Risk of death from using the pill is less than the risk associated with a full-term pregnancy. The pill is the most effective method of contraception other than sterilization or perhaps combined barrier methods. Oral contraceptives have an annual failure rate of less than 1 percent.Long-lasting injectable or implantable steroids are also used to block ovulation. DepoProvera is an injectable progestin that blocks normal pituitary function for several months. Another device, called Norplant, consists of thin, flexible tubes filled with progestin. Several of these tubes are inserted under the skin, where they continue to release progestin slowly for years.The "mini-pill" is an oral contraceptive that contains very low doses of progestins. Although it may interfere with the normal maturation and release of ova, its principal mode of action is to alter the environment of the female reproductive tract so that it is not hospitable to sperm. Cervical mucus normally becomes watery at the time of ovulation, but low levels of progestin keep the mucus thick and sticky so that it blocks the passage of sperm.preventing implantation. A highly effective method of contraception (with a failure rate varying from 1 percent to about 7 percent) is the intrauterine device, or IUD. The IUD is a small piece of plastic or copper that is inserted in the uterus. The IUD probably works by preventing implantation of the fertilized egg. Another way of interfering with implantation is through the use of "morning-after pills," which deliver high doses of steroids, primarily estrogens. By acting in several ways on the oviduct and the uterine lining, this treatment prevents implantation. Morning-after pills can be effective up to several days after intercourse.A recent addition to birth control technology is a drug, RU-486, developed in France. RU-486 is not a contraceptive pill, but a contragestational pill. It is a progesterone-like molecule that blocks progesterone receptors. It therefore interferes with the normal action of progesterone produced by the corpus luteum, which is necessary for the maintenance of the uterine lining in early pregnancy. If RU-486 is administered as a morning-after pill, it prevents implantation. However, RU-486 can be effective even if taken at the time of the first missed menses after fertilization, after implantation has been initiated. After a few days of treatment with RU-486, the endometrium regresses and sloughs off along with the embryo, which is in very early stages of development. One virtually foolproof method of contraception is sterilization of either the man or the woman. Male sterilization by vasectomy is a simple operation than can be performed under a local anesthetic in a doctor's office. After this minor surgery, the semen no longer contains sperm. Sperm production continues, but since the sperm cannot move out of the testes, they are destroyed by macrophages. Vasectomy does not affect a man's hormone levels or his sexual responses, and even the amount of semen he ejaculates is unchanged, because the sperm constitute so little of its volume. In female sterilization, the aim is to prevent the egg from traveling to the uterus and to block sperm from reaching the egg. The most common method is tubal ligation-cutting and tying the oviducts. Alternatively, the oviducts may be burned (cauterized) to seal them off, using a surgical technique called endoscopy. As in the male, these procedures do not alter reproductive hormones or sexual responses.abortion.Once a fertilized egg has successfully implanted itself in the uterus, the termination of a pregnancy is called an abortion. A spontaneous abortion is the medical term for what is usually called a miscarriage. Miscarriages are common early in pregnancy; most of them occur because of an abnormality in the fetus or in the process of implantation. Abortions that are not spontaneous, but are the result of medical intervention, may be done either for therapeutic or for contraceptive purposes. A therapeutic abortion may be necessary to protect the health of the mother, or it may be performed because prenatal testing (which will be discussed in the following chapter) reveals that the fetus has a severe defect. When performed in the first third of a pregnancy, a medical abortion carries less risk than a full-term pregnancy. The method is to dilate the cervix and then remove the fetus and the endometrium by physical means. After the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, the risk associated with a medical abortion rises substantially. You may ask why all the chemical approaches to controlling fertility apply to females and none have been devised to block male fertility. The control of male fertility is a difficult problem. First, since the production of sperm is a continuous, rather than a cyclical, event, it is not possible to block a particular step in a cyclical process. The ovarian cycle is vulnerable to manipulation because certain events must happen at certain times for ovulation and implantation to occur. Second, the suppression of spermatogenesis must be total to be effective, since it takes only a single sperm to fertilize an egg, and normally millions are produced. Such suppression requires powerful and continuous chemical intervention with associated side effects.42.4.3 Reproductive technologies help solve problems of infertility 748There are many reasons why a man and woman may not be able to have children. The man's rate of sperm production may be low, or his sperm may lack motility. The mucus in the woman's reproductive tract may be thick and not conducive to sperm moving up to the oviducts. Structural problems may also exist, such as a woman's oviducts being blocked by scar tissue or by endometriosis, a proliferation of endometrial cells outside of the uterus. In some cases, treatment with powerful chemicals to cure cancer damages the ability of the gonads to produce gametes.Even a couple who are fully fertile and who want children may not want to take the risk of the natural process of fertilization if one or both parents are carriers for a genetic disease. A number of reproductive technologies have been developed to overcome these and other barriers to childbearing.The oldest and simplest reproductive technology is artificial insemination, which involves placing sperm in the appropriate place in the female's reproductive tract for fertilization to occur. This technique is useful if the male's sperm count is low, if the sperm lack motility, or if problems in the female's reproductive tract prevent the normal movement of sperm up to and through the oviducts. Artificial insemination is used widely in the production of domesticated animals such as cattle. More recent advances, called assisted reproductive technologies, or ART's, involve procedures that remove unfertilized eggs from the ovary, combine them with sperm outside of the body, and then place fertilized eggs or egg/sperm mixtures in the appropriate location in the female's reproductive tract for development to take place.The first successful ART was in vitro fertilization (IVF). In IVF, the mother is treated with hormones that stimulate many follicles in her ovaries to mature. Eggs are harvested from these follicles, and sperm are collected from the father. Eggs and sperm are combined in a culture medium outside the body (in vitro), where fertilization takes place. The resulting embryos can then be injected into the mother's uterus in the blastocyst stage or kept frozen for implantation later. The first "test tube baby" resulting from IVF was born in 1978. Since that time, thousands of babies have been produced by this ART. IVF is useful when the woman's oviducts are blocked. It has a success rate of 20 to 25 percent. A technique called gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) can be used when only the entrance to the oviducts from the ovaries, or the upper segment of the oviducts, is blocked. In this procedure, harvested eggs and sperm are injected directly into the upper regions of the oviduct, where fertilization takes place, and the blastocyst enters the uterus via the normal route. GIFT has a success rate of about 30 percent.A major cause of failure of IVF and GIFT is the failure of sperm to gain access to the plasma membranes of eggs. To solve this problem, methods have been developed to inject a sperm cell directly into the cytoplasm of an egg. In intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), a harvested egg is held in place by suction applied to a polished glass pipette. A slender, sharp pipette is then used to penetrate the egg and inject a sperm. This ART was successful for the first time in 1992; now thousands of these procedures are performed in U.S. clinics each year, with a success rate of about 25 percent.IVF coupled with sensitive techniques of genetic analysis, can eliminate the risk that parents who are carriers for genetic diseases will produce affected children. With in vitro fertilization, it is possible to take a cell from the blastocyst at the 4- or 8-celled stage without damaging its developmental potential. The sampled cell can then be subjected to molecular techniques to determine whether it carries the harmful gene. This information guarantees that only embryos that will not develop the genetic disease are implanted in the mother's uterus.42.4.4 Sexual behavior transmits many disease organisms 750Disease-causing organisms are parasites, and have a very limited ability to survive outside a host organism. Therefore, getting from host to host is a major evolutionary challenge for disease-causing organisms. One of the most intimate types of contact that hosts can have is copulation. It is not surprising, then, that many parasitic organisms have evolved to depend on sexual contact between their hosts as their means of transmission. These organisms are the causes of sexually transmitted diseases (commonly referred to as STD's), and they include viruses, bacteria, yeasts, and protozoans. STD's have been with humans since ancient times, and they are one of the most serious public health problems today. Over 10 million new cases of STD's occur each year in the United States, and about two-thirds of these cases occur in people between the ages of 15 and 30. About half of the youth in this country will contract an STD before the age of 25. A summary of the most common STD's is presented in Table 42_2. The highly prevalent bacterially transmitted diseases chlamydia and gonorrhea are generally not fatal, but when untreated are a major cause of infertility and painful inflammatory diseases. Syphilis is transmitted by a spirochete and is fatal in about half of untreated cases. It is believed that syphilis was brought to the Old World from the New World by the crew of Christopher Columbus, who himself died of advanced syphilis 16 years after his first voyage to North America. AIDS, transmitted by a virus, is an STD of recent origin and currently has a high rate of mortality. The only device that is effective against the transmission of STD's is the condom.43 Animal DevelopmentThe whale blows its nose out the top of its head-as in "thar she blows," the infamous whalers' cry. The spout coming out of the blowhole is the whale's exhalation coming out of its nasal passages. It is convenient for a marine mammal to be able to breathe out of the top of its head. Not much of its body has to come out of the water for it to breathe, and it can continue moving forward through the water while breathing. But in most mammals, the nose is on the front of the head. How did the whale's nose happen to get to the top of its head? This is an evolutionary question, but the answer is to be found in embryological development. The vertebrate body varies enormously among species in form and function, yet its basic structural design is highly conserved. For example, the whale flipper, the bat wing, and the human arm all have the same bones. However, during development these bones assume different shapes and dimensions to adapt the forelimbs to their various functions: swimming, flying, and tool use.Similarly, vertebrates all have the same bones in their heads, but through development, these bones grow differentially, and therefore the skull takes on different shapes. In both the whale and the human, the nasal passages are in the nasal bone, which in both is just above the bones of the upper jaw. In the human, that places the nasal bone just above the jaw on the front of the face. During development of the whale skull, however, the bones of the upper jaw grow enormously relative to the other bones of the skull, and project far forward to form the cavernous mouth. As a result of this differential forward growth of the jaw bone, the nasal bone ends up on the top of the skull rather than on the front. The answer to why the whale's nose is on the top of its head and how forelimbs become flippers is found in the processes of development that form and shape the components of the basic vertebrate body plan. Starting from the organization of the fertilized egg, signaling cascades unfold that control the building of the body. Typically, molecules acting as transcription factors influence the temporal and spatial expression of still other genes that control the growth and differentiation of cells. Interactions between cells set up ever more complex signaling relationships that result in the structural and functional differences between species. The chemical and genetic nature of these signals is remarkably similar over widely different species, but the exciting story of development is how these signals are used in different patterns and combinations to produce what we see as different species.In this chapter we trace the early stages of embryonic development. We begin with the events of fertilization, which can be taken as the starting point for the development of the organism. From there we see how the zygote is converted by rapid cell divisions into a mass of cells. These cells then change position relative to each other, establishing new contacts between different groups of cells. These contacts initiate sequences of changes in cell growth, cell movements, and cell differentiation from which emerge the overall body plan, the various tissues, and the rudimentary organs of the adult.To appreciate both the diversity and the similarity in the development of different animals, we discuss these early developmental steps in four organisms studied extensively by developmental biologists: sea urchins (invertebrates) and frogs, chicks, and humans (all vertebrates). 43.1Fertilization: Interactions of Sperm and Egg 753Development in sexually reproducing animals begins with fertilization, the union of sperm and egg to create a single cell: a diploid zygote. Fertilization requires a complex series of events: The sperm and the egg must recognize each other. The sperm must be activated so that it is capable of gaining access to the plasma membrane of the egg. The plasma membranes of the sperm and the egg must fuse. The egg must block entry by additional sperm. In mammals, the egg nucleus must complete its final meiotic division. The egg and sperm nuclei must fuse to create the diploid nucleus of the zygote. We will look at each of these steps in turn.43.1.1 Recognition molecules assure specificty in sperm-egg interactions 753Specific recognition molecules mediate interactions between sperm and eggs. These molecules assure that the activities of the sperm are directed toward eggs and not other cells, and they help prevent eggs from being fertilized by sperm from the wrong species. The latter function is particularly important in species that engage in external fertilization. The sea urchin is such a species, and its mechanisms of fertilization have been well studied. The plasma membrane of the sea urchin egg is protected by a proteinaceous vitelline envelope, and surrounding that is a jelly coat. The sperm must get through these two protective layers before it can fuse with the plasma membrane of the egg. Toaccomplish this, the sperm has a membrane-enclosed structure called an acrosome containing enzymes and other proteins. The acrosome is located at the front end of the sperm headand covers the nucleus.When the sperm makes contact with an egg of the right species, substances in the jelly coat trigger an acrosomal reaction, which begins with the release of acrosomal enzymes that digest the jelly coat. Next, an acrosomal process extends out of the head of the sperm. The acrosomal process forms from globular actin behind the acrosome, which polymerizes when the acrosomal membrane breaks down. The acrosomal process extends through the jelly coat to make contact with the vitelline envelope. Herein lies another species recognition mechanism: The acrosomal process is coated with a membrane-bound protein called bindin. Different species have different bindin molecules. The egg plasma membrane has species-specific bindin receptors that extend through the vitelline envelope. The reaction of acrosomal bindin with these receptors stimulates the egg membrane to form a fertilization cone that engulfs the sperm head, bringing it into the egg cytoplasm.In animals that practice internal fertilization, mating behaviors help guarantee species specificity, but egg-sperm recognition mechanisms still exist. The mammalian egg is surrounded by a thick layer called the cumulus, which consists of follicle cells in a gelatinous matrix. Beneath the cumulus is a glycoprotein envelope called the zona pellucida, which is functionally similar to the vitelline envelope of sea urchin eggs. When sperm are first deposited in the vagina, they are not capable of mounting an acrosomal reaction, but after being in the female reproductive tract for a time, the sperm undergo capacitation. A capacitated sperm is capable of interacting with an egg and its barriers, probably because certain critical proteins on its surface have been altered to make them reactive. Mammalian sperm have enzymes on their surface that help them digest a path through the cumulus. When they make contact with the zona pellucida, a species-specific glycoprotein in the zona binds to recognition molecules on the head of the sperm. This binding triggers the acrosomal reaction, releasing acrosomal enzymes that digest a path through the zona. Other egg plasma membrane proteins then bind to adhesive proteins on the sperm, facilitating the fusion of sperm and egg plasma membranes. The importance of the zona pellucida and its binding molecules in protection against heterospecific interactions between sperm and eggs was revealed in experiments in which the zona was stripped from eggs before they were exposed to sperm in a culture dish. In these experiments, it was possible for hamster sperm to fertilize human eggs, creating a hamster-human hybrid zygote. The hybrid zygote did not survive its first cell division because of chromosomal incompatibilities, but the experiment demonstrated that the mammalian species recognition mechanism resides in the zona.43.1.2 Sperm entry triggers blocks to polyspermy and activates the egg 754The fusion of the sperm and egg plasma membranes and the entry of the sperm into the egg initiate a programmed sequence of events. The first responses to sperm entry are blocks to polyspermy-that is, mechanisms that prevent more than one sperm from entering the egg. If more than one sperm enters the egg, the resulting embryo probably will not survive. Blocks to polyspermy have been studied intensively in sea urchin eggs, which can be fertilized in a dish of seawater. Within a tenth of a second after a sperm enters a sea urchin egg, there is an influx of sodium ions, which changes the electric potential across the egg's plasma membrane. This fast block to polyspermy prevents the fusion of other sperm with the egg plasma membrane. The slow block to polyspermy takes about a minute. Before fertilization, the vitelline envelope is bonded to the plasma membrane. Just under the plasma membrane are cortical granules consisting of enzymes and other proteins. The sea urchin egg, like all animal cells, contains calcium that is sequestered in endoplasmic reticulum.When a sperm enters, the sea urchin egg releases calcium from its endoplasmic reticulum into its own cytoplasm. This increase in cytoplasmic calcium causes the cortical granules to fuse with the plasma membrane. The cortical granule enzymes are released by exocytosis, breaking the bonds between the vitelline envelope and the plasma membrane. Water then flows into the space between the vitelline envelope and the plasma membrane, raising the vitelline envelope to form the fertilization envelope. The enzymes also degrade unused sperm-binding molecules at the surface of the fertilization envelope and cause it to harden, preventing the passage of additional sperm. In mammals, sperm entry does not seem to cause a rapid change in membrane potential, but it does trigger the phosphatidylinositol (PTI) signaling system, resulting in several events. Calcium is released from the endoplasmic reticulum, and the egg's metabolism is activated. The pH of the cytoplasm increases, oxygen consumption rises, and protein synthesis increases. In mammals, the nuclei of the sperm and the egg do not fuse until about 12 hours after the sperm nucleus is taken into the egg cytoplasm because the nucleus of the egg must still complete its second meiotic division. Sea urchin eggs have already completed the second meiotic division at the time of sperm entry, and the nuclei fuse within an hour to create the zygote.43.1.3 The sperm and the egg make different contributions to the zygote 754Nearly all of the cytoplasm of the zygote comes from the egg. This cytoplasm is well stocked with nutrients, ribosomes, and a variety of molecules, including mRNAs. Moreover, because the sperm mitochondria degenerate, all of the mitochondria in the zygote come from the egg. In addition to its haploid nucleus, the sperm makes one other important contribution to the zygote in some species: a centriole. This centriole becomes the centrosome of the zygote, which produces the mitotic spindles for subsequent cell divisions. For a long time, it was assumed that the one thing that sperm and egg contributed equally to the zygote was their haploid nuclei. However, we now know that even though they are equivalent in terms of genetic material, mammalian sperm and eggs are not equivalent in terms of their roles in development. In the laboratory, it is possible to construct zygotes in which both haploid nuclei come from the mother or both come from the father. In neither case does development progress normally. Apparently, in mammals at least, certain genes involved in development are active only if they come from a sperm and others are active only if they come from an egg-a phenomenon that has been termed genomic imprinting.43.1.4 Fertilization causes rearrangements of egg cytoplasm 755The entry of the sperm into the egg stimulates changes and rearrangements of the cytoplasm that establish the symmetry and the body axes of the embryo. The nutrients and molecules in the cytoplasm of the zygote are not homogeneously distributed, and are not divided equally among all daughter cells when cell divisions begin. This unequal division of cytoplasmic factors sets the stage for the unfolding series of signals that orchestrates the sequential steps of development: determination, differentiation, and morphogenesis. The rearrangements of egg cytoplasm in some species of frogs can be easily observed because of pigments in the egg cytoplasm. The nutrient molecules in an unfertilized frog egg are dense, and are therefore concentrated by gravity in the lower half of the egg, which is called the vegetal hemisphere. The haploid nucleus of the egg is located at the opposite end of the egg, in the animal hemisphere. The outermost (cortical) cytoplasm of the animal hemisphere is heavily pigmented, and the underlying cytoplasm has more diffuse pigmentation. The vegetal hemisphere is not pigmented.Sperm always enter the frog egg in the animal hemisphere.When this occurs, the cortical cytoplasm rotates toward the site of sperm entry. This rotation exposes a band of diffusely pigmented cytoplasm on the side of the egg opposite the site of sperm entry. This band, called the gray crescent, will be the site of important developmental events. The cytoplasmic rearrangements that create the gray crescent bring different regions of cytoplasm into contact on opposite sides of the egg. Therefore, bilateral symmetry is imposed on what was a radially symmetrical egg. Instead of just the up-down difference of the animal and vegetal hemispheres, the movement of the cytoplasm sets the stage for the creation of anterior-posterior and left-right axes. In the frog, the site of sperm entry will become the ventral (belly) region, and the gray crescent will become the dorsal (back) region of the embryo. Since the gray crescent also marks the posterior end of the embryo, these relationships specify the anterior-posterior and left-right axes as well.The molecular mechanism of this critical first step in embryo formation is beginning to be understood. The sperm centriole rearranges the microtubules in the vegetal pole cytoplasm into a parallel array that presumably guides the movement of the cortical cytoplasm. Organelles and certain proteins from the vegetal hemisphere move to the gray crescent region even faster than the cortical cytoplasm rotates. As a result of these movements of cytoplasm, proteins, and organelles, changes in the distribution of critical developmental signals occur. A protein kinase called GSK-3 and a protein called ?-catenin become unevenly distributed in the cytoplasm of the frog zygote. ?-catenin is produced from maternal mRNA found throughout the cytoplasm of the egg. Once the zygote becomes a multicellular embryo, ?-catenin will act as a transcription factor in the nuclei of those cells where it is present. GSK-3, which is also present throughout the egg cytoplasm, causes the degradation of ?-catenin. However, inhibitors of GSK-3 migrate along the vegetal microtubules and prevent GSK-3 from degrading ?-catenin. As a result, there is a higher concentration of ?-catenin on what will become the dorsal side of the embryo. Evidence supports the hypothesis that ?-catenin is a key player in the cell-cell signaling cascade that begins the formation of the embryo in the region of the gray crescent. But before there can be cell-cell signaling, there must be multiple cells. 43.2 Cleavage: Repackaging the Cytoplasm 756The first stage of development is a rapid series of cell divisions called cleavage. Because the cytoplasm of the zygote is not homogeneous, these first cell divisions result in the differential distribution of nutrients and informational molecules among the cells of the early embryo. In most animals, cleavage proceeds with rapid DNA synthesis and mitosis, but no cell growth and little gene expression. Thus, the embryo becomes a ball of smaller and smaller cells. This ball or mass of cells soon forms a central cavity called a blastocoel (a process called blastulation), at which point it is called a blastula. The individual cells are called blastomeres. Cleavage, and therefore the formation of the blastula, is influenced in different species by two major factors. First, in some species, massive amounts of nutrients, or yolk, are stored in the egg. The yolk influences the pattern of cell divisions by impeding the formation of cleavage furrows between the daughter cells. Second, proteins and mRNAs stored in the egg by the mother guide the formation of mitotic spindles and the timing of cell divisions.43.2.1 The amount of yolk influences cleavage 757When the yolk content of the egg is sparse, there is little interference with cleavage furrow formation, and all the daughter cells are of similar size; the sea urchin egg provides an example. More yolk means more resistance to cleavage furrow formation; therefore, cell divisions progress more rapidly in the animal hemisphere than in the vegetal hemisphere, where the yolk is concentrated. As a result, the cells derived from the vegetal hemisphere are fewer and larger; the frog egg provides an example. In spite of this difference between sea urchin and frog eggs, the cleavage furrows completely divide the egg mass in both cases; thus these animals are said to have complete cleavage. In contrast, in an egg, such as the chicken egg, that contains a lot of yolk, the cleavage furrows do not penetrate the yolk. As a result, cleavage is incomplete, and the embryo forms as a disc of cells, called a blastodisc, on top of the yolk mass. This type of cleavage, called incomplete cleavage, is common in fishes, reptiles, and birds. Another type of incomplete cleavage, called superficial cleavage, occurs in insects such as the fruit fly (Drosophila). In the insect egg, the massive yolk is centrally located. Early in development, cycles of mitosis occur without cytokinesis. Eventually the resulting nuclei migrate to the periphery of the egg, and after several more mitotic cycles, the plasma membrane of the egg grows inward, partitioning the nuclei off into individual cells.43.2.2 The orientation of mitotic spindles influences the pattern of cleavage 757The positions of the mitotic spindles during cleavage are not random; rather, they are determined by cytoplasmic factors. In turn, the orientation of the mitotic spindles determines the cleavage planes and, therefore, the arrangement of the daughter cells. If the mitotic spindles of successive cell divisions form at right angles or parallel to the animal-vegetal axis of the zygote, the cleavage pattern is radial, as in the sea urchin and the frog. The orientations of successive mitotic spindles in mammals are also at right angles or parallel to the animal-vegetal axis, but the sequence is different from that in sea urchins, resulting in a pattern called rotational cleavage. In mollusks, the successive mitotic spindles are not at right angles; the resulting pattern has a twist, and is called spiral cleavage. The coiling of snail shells is an expression of this form of cleavage.43.2.3 Cleavage in mammals is unique 758The early development of placental mammals is quite different from that of the other species we have discussed. The zygote of a placental mammal produces both an embryo and the elaborate extraembryonic structures that serve as the interface between the embryo and the maternal uterus. Cell divisions are slower and genes are expressed during cleavage in placental mammals. As a result, proteins encoded by the genes of the embryo play a role in cleavage. In other species, cleavage is directed almost entirely by molecules that were present in the egg. As in other animals that have complete cleavage, the early cell divisions in a mammalian zygote produce a loosely associated ball of cells. However, at about the 8-cell stage, the behavior of the cells changes. They suddenly maximize their surface contact with each other, form tight junctions, and become a very compact mass of cells. At the transition from the 16-cell to the 32-cell stage, the cells separate into two groups. The innermost cells form the inner cell mass that will become the embryo, while the outermost cells become an encompassing sac called the trophoblast, which will become part of the placenta. The trophoblast cells secrete fluid, thus creating a cavity with the inner cell mass at one end. At this stage, the mammalian embryo is called a blastocyst to distinguish it from the blastula of other animals. When the blastocyst reaches the uterus, the trophoblast adheres to the uterine wall, beginning the process of implantation that embeds the embryo in the endometrium. In humans, implantation begins about the sixth day after fertilization. Implantation must not occur as the blastocyst moves down the oviduct to the uterus, or the result will be an ectopic or tubal pregnancy-a very dangerous condition. Early implantation is normally prevented by the zona pellucida, which remains around the cleaving ball of cells. At about the time the blastocyst reaches the uterus, it "hatches" from the zona pellucida, and implantation can occur.43.2.4 Specific blastomeres generate specific tissues and organs 755Cleavage in all species results in a repackaging of the cytoplasm of the egg into a large number of small cells surrounding a central cavity. Little cell differentiation has occurred during cleavage, and in most nonmammalian species none of the genome of the embryo has been expressed. Nevertheless, cells in different regions of the blastula possess different complements of the nutrients and informational molecules that were present in the egg. The blastocoel prevents cells from different regions of the blastula from interacting, but that will soon change. During the next stage of development, the cells of the blastula will move around and come into new associations with one another, communicate instructions to one another, and begin to differentiate. In many animals, the movements of the blastomeres are so regular and well orchestrated that it is possible to label a specific blastomere and identify the tissues and organs that form from its progeny. Such labeling experiments produce fate maps of the blastula.Blastomeres become determined-committed to specific fates-at different times in different species. In some species, such as roundworms and clams, blastomeres at the 8-cell stage are already determined. If one of these blastomeres is experimentally removed, a particular portion of the embryo will not form. This type of development has been called mosaic development because each blastomere seems to contribute a specific set of "tiles" to the final "mosaic" that is the adult animal. In contrast, other species, such as sea urchins, frogs, and vertebrates, have regulative development: The loss of some cells during cleavage does not affect the developing embryo because the remaining cells compensate for the loss. If some blastomeres can change their fate to compensate for the loss of other cells during cleavage and blastula formation, are these cells capable of forming an entire embryo? To a certain extent they are. During cleavage or early blastula formation, if the blastomeres are physically separated into two groups, both groups can produce complete embryos. Since the two embryos come from the same zygote, they will be monozygotic twins-genetically identical. Non-identical twins occur when two separate eggs are fertilized by two separate sperm. Thus, while identical twins are always of the same sex, non-identical twins have a 50 percent chance of being the same sex. 43.3 Gastrulation: Producing the Body Plan 759The blastula is typically a fluid-filled ball of cells. How does this ball of cells become an embryo, made up of multiple tissue layers, with head and tail ends and dorsal and ventral sides? Gastrulation is the process by which layers of tissue, called germ layers, form and take specific positions relative to one another (Table 43.1). The resulting spatial relations between tissues make possible inductive interactions: exchanges of signals among tissues that trigger differentiation and organ formation. During gastrulation, the animal body forms three germ layers: Some blastomeres move as a sheet to the inside of the embryo, creating an inner germ layer, the endoderm, which will give rise to gut tissues. The cells remaining on the outside become the outer germ layer, the ectoderm, and give rise to the epidermis and the nervous system. Other cells migrate between these two layers to become the middle germ layer, or mesoderm, which will contribute tissues to many organs, including bones, muscles, liver, heart, and blood vessels.Some of the most challenging and interesting questions in animal development have concerned what directs the cell movements of gastrulation and what is responsible for the resulting patterns of cell differentiation and organ formation. In the past 20 years scientists have answered many of these questions at the molecular level. In the discussion that follows, we consider the similarities and differences of gastrulation in sea urchins, frogs, reptiles, birds, and mammals. We also review some of the exciting discoveries about the mechanisms underlying these phenomena.43.3.1 Involution of the vegetal pole characterizes gastrulation in the sea urchin759The sea urchin blastula is a simple, hollow ball of cells that is only one cell layer thick. The end of the blastula stage is marked by a dramatic slowing of the rate of mitosis, and the beginning of gastrulation is marked by a flattening of the vegetal hemisphere. Some cells at the vegetal pole bulge into the blastocoel, break free, and migrate into the cavity. These cells become primary mesenchyme cells-cells of the middle germ layer, the mesoderm. (The word "mesenchyme" means "a loosely organized group of cells," in contrast to cells formed into a tightly packed sheet.) The flattening at the vegetal pole becomes an involution, as if someone were poking a finger into a hollow ball. The cells that involute become the endoderm and form the primitive gut, the archenteron. At the tip of the archenteron more cells break free, entering the blastocoel to form more mesoderm, the secondary mesenchyme.The archenteron continues to move inward, partly because of changes in the shapes of its cells and partly because it is pulled by secondary mesenchyme cells. These cells, attached to the tip of the archenteron, send out extensions that adhere to the overlying ectoderm and contract. Where the archenteron eventually makes contact with the ectoderm, the mouth will form, and the blastopore, the opening created by the invagination of the vegetal pole, will become the anus of the animal. What mechanisms control the various cell movements of sea urchin gastrulation? The immediate answer is that specific properties of particular cells change. For example, some vegetal cells migrate into the blastocoel to form the primary mesenchyme because they lose their attachments to neighboring cells. Once they bulge into the blastocoel, they move by extending long processes called filopodia along an extracellular matrix of proteins that is laid down by the ectodermal cells lining the blastocoel. A deeper understanding of gastrulation requires that we discover the molecular mechanisms whereby certain cells of the blastula develop properties different from those of others. Cleavage divides up the cytoplasm of the egg in a very systematic way. The sea urchin blastula at the 64-cell stage can be viewed as consisting of tiers of cells. As in the frog blastula, the top is the animal pole and the bottom the vegetal pole. If different tiers of blastula cells are separated, they show different developmental potentials. Only cells from the vegetal pole are capable of initiating the development of a complete larva. It has been proposed that transcriptional regulatory proteins are unevenly distributed in the egg cytoplasm and therefore end up in particular groups of cells as cleavage progresses. Possibly, transcription factors found in the lowest vegetal cells become active in early cleavage. Indeed, one of these factors appears to be ?-catenin, the transcription factor that is differentially distributed in the frog zygote. The genes activated by ?-catenin seem to produce proteins that set up a signaling cascade that initiates the processes of cell determination and differentiation. Let's turn now to gastrulation in the frog, in which a number of key signaling molecules have been identified.43.3.2 Gastrulation in the frog begins at the gray crescent 761Amphibian blastulas have considerable yolk and are more than one cell layer thick; therefore, gastrulation is more complex in the frog than in the sea urchin. Gastrulation begins when certain cells in the gray crescent region of the blastula change their shape and their cell adhesion properties. These are the cells that received high concentrations of ?-catenin in their cytoplasm and therefore made certain proteins that cells in other parts of the blastula did not make. In some way, this pattern of gene expression causes the bodies of these cells to bulge into the blastocoel while they remain attached to the outer surface by slender necks. Because of their shape, these cells are called bottle cells.As the bottle cells move into the interior of the blastula, they appear to pull other surface cells in after them. This process creates a lip over which a sheet of cells moves into the blastocoel. The first involuting cells are the prospective endoderm, and they form the primitive gut, the archenteron. These cells also bring into the blastocoel the cells that will form the mesoderm. The initial site of involution is called the dorsal lip of the blastopore, and it plays a central role in vertebrate development. As gastrulation proceeds, cells from all over the surface of the blastula move toward the site of invagination. This movement of cells toward the blastopore is called epiboly. The dorsal lip of the amphibian blastopore widens and eventually forms a complete circle surrounding a plug of yolk-rich cells. As cells continue to move in through the blastopore, the archenteron grows and gradually displaces the blastocoel. As gastrulation comes to an end, the embryo consists of three germ layers: ectoderm on the outside, endoderm on the inside, and mesoderm in the middle. The embryo also has a dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior organization. Most importantly, however, the fates of specific regions of the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm have become "determined" such that they will differentiate into specific tissue types. The discovery of determination, our next topic, is one of the most exciting stories in animal development.43.3.3 The dorsal lip of the blastopore organizes formation of the embryo 762Early in the 1900s, German biologist Hans Spemann was studying the development of salamander eggs. He was interested in finding out whether nuclei remain totipotent-capable of directing the development of a complete embryo-during cleavage and blastula formation. With great patience and dexterity, he formed a loop from a single human baby hair to constrict fertilized eggs.When Spemann's loop bisected the gray crescent, the cells on both sides of the constriction developed into complete embryos. But when the gray crescent was on only one side of the constriction, only that side gastrulated and developed into a complete embryo. The side lacking gray crescent material became a clump of undifferentiated cells Spemann called the "belly piece". Spemann thus hypothesized that cytoplasmic factors contained in the region of the gray crescent are necessary for gastrulation and thus for the development of a normal organism.To test his hypotheses, Spemann and his student Hilde Mangold conducted a series of delicate tissue transplantation experiments. They transplanted pieces of early gastrulas to various locations on other gastrulas. Guided by fate maps, they were able to take a piece of ectoderm they knew would develop into epidermis and transplant it to a region that normally becomes nervous system, and vice versa. When they did these transplants in early gastrulas, the transplanted pieces always developed into tissues that were appropriate for the location where they were placed. Donor presumptive epidermis (that is, cells destined to become skin in their original location) developed into host nervous system, and donor presumptive neural ectoderm developed into host skin. Thus, the fates of the transplanted cells had not been determined before the transplantation. In late gastrulas, however, the same experiment yielded opposite results. Donor presumptive epidermis produced patches of skin cells in the host nervous system, and donor presumptive neural ectoderm produced neurons in the host skin. Something had occurred during gastrulation to determine the fates of the embryonic cells. In other words, as Spemann had hypothesized, the path of differentiation a cell would follow was determined during gastrulation.Then Spemann and Mangold did an experiment that produced momentous results: they transplanted the dorsal lip of the blastopore. When this small piece of tissue was transplanted into the presumptive belly area of another gastrula, it stimulated a second site of gastrulation, and another whole embryo formed belly-to-belly with the original embryo. The dorsal lip of the blastula was apparently capable of inducing the formation of an embryo. Thus, Spemann and Mangold called the dorsal lip of the blastopore the primary embryonic organizer. The primary embryonic organizer has been studied intensively, and we are beginning to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in its action. The distribution of ?-catenin corresponds to the location of theprimary embryonic organizer, so it is a candidate molecule for initiating organizer activity. Correlation is not enough, however. To prove that a molecule is an inductive signal, it has to be shown that it is both necessary and sufficient for the proposed effect. In other words, the effect should not occur where expected if the candidate molecule is eliminated (necessity), and the candidate molecule must be capable of inducing the effect where it would otherwise not occur (sufficiency).The criteria of necessity and sufficiency have been satisfied for ?-catenin. If ?-catenin transcripts are depleted by injections of antisense RNA into the egg, gastrulation does not occur. If ?-catenin is experimentally overexpressed in another region of the blastula, it can induce a second axis of embryo formation, as the dorsal lip did in the Spemann-Mangold transplantation experiments. Thus, ?-catenin appears to be both necessary and sufficient for the formation of the primary embryonic organizer, but it is only one component of a complex signaling cascade that is still the subject of intense investigation.43.3.4 Reptilian and avian gastrulation is an adaptation to yolky eggs 763The eggs of reptiles and birds have a massive yolk content, and therefore the blastulas of these species develop as a disc of cells on top of the yolk. We will use the chicken egg to show how gastrulation occurs in a flat disc of cells rather than in a ball of cells.Cleavage in the chick results in a flat, circular layer of cells called the blastodisc. Between the blastodisc and the yolk mass is a fluid-filled space. Some cells from the blastodisc break free and move into this space. Other cells grow into this space from the posterior margin of the blastodisc. These cells come together to form a continuous layer called the hypoblast. The overlying cells are called the epiblast. Thus, the avian blastula is a flattened structure consisting of an upper epiblast and a lower hypoblast, which are joined at the margins of the blastodisc. The blastocoel is the fluid-filled space between the epiblast and hypoblast. Gastrulation begins with a thickening of a posterior region of the epiblast caused by the movement of cells toward the midline and then forward along the midline. The result is a midline ridge called the primitive streak. A depression called the primitive groove forms along the length of the primitive streak. The primitive groove becomes the blastopore as cells migrate through it into the blastocoel to become endoderm and mesoderm.In the avian embryo, no archenteron forms, but the prospective endoderm and mesoderm migrate forward to form gut and other structures. At the extreme forward end of the primitive groove is a thickening called Hensen's node, which is the equivalent of the dorsal lip of the amphibian blastopore. In fact, many signaling molecules that have been identified in the frog organizer are also expressed in Hensen's node. Cells passing over Hensen's node become determined to differentiate into the tissues and structures that make up the head and the dorsal midline of the embryo.43.3.5 Mammals have no yolk, but retain the avian-reptilian gastrulation pattern 764Mammals and birds both evolved from reptilian ancestors, so it is not surprising that they share patterns of early development, even though the eggs of placental mammals have no yolk. Earlier we described the development of the mammalian trophoblast and the inner cell mass, which is the equivalent of the avian epiblast. Keeping avian gastrulation in mind, think of the mammalian inner cell mass as sitting on top of an imaginary body of yolk. As in avian development, the inner cell mass splits into an upper layer called the epiblast and a lower layer called the hypoblast with a fluid-filled cavity, or blastocoel, between them. The embryo will form from the epiblast, and the hypoblast will contribute to the extraembryonic membranes. The epiblast also contributes to the extraembryonic membranes; specifically, it splits off an upper layer of cells that will form the amnion. The amnion will grow to surround the developing embryo as a sac filled with amniotic fluid. Gastrulation occurs in the mammalian epiblast just as it does in the avian epiblast. A primitive groove forms, and epiblast cells migrate through the groove to become layers of endoderm and mesoderm. The cells migrating over Hensen's node become the cells that form dorsal structures such as the brain and spinal cord. 43.4 Neurulation: Initiating the Nervous System 765Gastrulation produces an embryo with three germ layers that are positioned to influence one another through inductive tissue interactions. During the next phase of development, called organogenesis, many organs and organ systems develop simultaneously and in coordination with one another. An early process of organogenesis that is directly related to gastrulation is neurulation, the initiation of the nervous system. We will examine this event in the amphibian embryo, but it occurs in a similar fashion in reptiles, birds, and mammals. Many of the genes involved are highly conserved all the way from worms to humans.43.4.1 The stage is set by the dorsal lip of the blastopore 765The cells that pass through the dorsal lip of the blastopore and move anteriorly in the blastocoel during gastrulation are determined to become mesoderm. The dorsal mesoderm closest to the midline is further determined to become chordomesoderm, which forms a rod along the dorsal midline. This rod, called the notochord, gives structural support to the developing embryo. The notochord eventually will be replaced by the vertebral column, but after gastrulation it induces the overlying ectoderm to begin forming the nervous system. Neurulation involves the formation of an internal tube from an external sheet of cells.The first signs of neurulation are flattening and thickening of the ectoderm overlying the notochord; this thickened area forms the neural plate. The edges of the neural plate that run in an anterior-posterior direction continue to thicken to form ridges or folds. Between the folds a groove forms and deepens as the folds roll over it to converge on the midline. The folds fuse, forming a cylinder, the neural tube, and a continuous overlying layer of epidermal ectoderm. The neural tube develops bulges at the anterior end, which become the major divisions of the brain; the rest of the tube becomes the spinal cord.Failure of the neural tube to develop normally can result in serious birth defects. If the neural tube fails to close in a posterior region, the result is a condition known as spina bifida. If it fails to close at the anterior end, an infant can develop without a forebrain-a condition called anencephaly. Whereas several genetic factors have been identified that can cause neural tube defects, there are also environmental factors, including dietary ones. The incidence of neural tube defects used to be about 1 in 300 live births, but we now know that this incidence can be cut in half if pregnant women have an adequate amount of folic acid (a B vitamin) in their diets.43.4.2 Body segmentation develops during neurulation 766Like the fruit flies whose development we traced in Chapter 16, vertebrates have a body plan consisting of repeating segments that are modified during development. These segments are most evident as the repeating patterns of vertebrae, ribs, nerves, and muscles along the anterior-posterior axis.As the neural tube forms, mesodermal tissues gather along the sides of the notochord to form separate blocks of cells called somites. The somites produce cells that will become vertebrae, ribs, and muscles of the trunk and limbs. The nerves that connect the brain and spinal cord with tissues and organs throughout the body are also arranged segmentally. The somites help guide the organization of these peripheral nerves, but the nerves are not of mesodermal origin. When the neural tube closes, cells adjacent to the line of closure break loose and migrate inward between the epidermis and the somites and under the somites. These cells, called neural crest cells, give rise to a number of structures, including the peripheral nerves, which grow out to the body tissues and back into the spinal cord. As development progresses, the segments of the body become different. Regions of the spinal cord differ, regions of the vertebral column differ in that some vertebrae grow ribs of various sizes and others do not, forelegs arise in the anterior part of the embryo, and hind legs arise in the posterior region. How does a somite in the anterior part of a mouse embryo "know" to produce forelegs rather than hind legs?Central to the process of anterior-posterior determination and differentiation are homeotic genes. We have seen how these genes control body segmentation in Drosophila. In the mouse, four families of similar genes, called Hox genes, control differentiation along the anterior-posterior body axis. Each family of mammalian Hox genes resides on a different chromosome and consists of about 10 genes. What is remarkable is that the temporal and spatial expression of these genes follows the same pattern as their linear order on their chromosomes. As a result, different segments of the embryo receive different combinations of Hox gene products, which serve as transcription factors. What causes the linear, sequential expression of Hox genes is unclear. Whereas Hox genes give cells information about their positional location on the anterior-posterior body axis, other genes give information about dorsal-ventral position. Tissues in each segment of the body differentiate according to their dorsal-ventral location. In the spinal cord, for example, sensory connections develop in the dorsal region and motor connections develop in the ventral region. In the somites, dorsal cells develop into skin and muscle and ventral cells develop into cartilage and bone.An example of a gene that provides dorsal-ventral information in vertebrates is sonic hedgehog, which is expressed in the mammalian notochord and induces cells in the overlying neural tube to follow fates characteristic of ventral spinal cord cells. (As with the Hox genes, sonic hedgehog is homologous to a Drosophila gene, known simply as hedgehog.) A family of homebox genes, the Pax genes, play many roles in nervous system and somite development. One of these genes, Pax3, is expressed in neural tube cells that develop into dorsal spinal cord structures. Sonic hedgehog represses the expression of Pax3, and their interaction is one source of dorsal-ventral information for differentiation of the spinal cord. With the development of body segmentation, the formation of organs and organ systems progresses rapidly. The development of an organ involves extensive inductive tissue interactions, which are a current focus of study for developmental biologists. In Chapter 16, you encountered the organogenesis of the vertebrate limb. In the next chapter you will learn about the development of the brain-another example of organogenesis. 43.5 Extraembryonic Membranes 767The embryos of reptiles, birds, and mammals are surrounded by several extraembryonic membranes, which originate from the embryo but are not part of it. The extraembryonic membranes play important roles in development, especially in mammals, in which they constitute the placenta that nourishes the embryo.43.5.1 Four extraembryonic membranes form with contributions from all germ layers 767We will use the chick to demonstrate how the extraembryonic membranes form from the germ layers created during gastrulation. The yolk sac is the first extraembryonic membrane to form, and it does so through extensions of the endodermal tissue of the hypoblast layer, which enclose the entire body of yolk in the egg. This yolk sac constricts at the top to create a tube that is continuous with the gut of the embryo. However, yolk does not pass through this tube. Yolk is digested by the endodermal cells of the yolk sac, and the nutrients are then transported to the embryo thorough blood vessels lining the outer surface of the yolk sac. Just as the endoderm grows out from the embryo to form the yolk sac, the ectoderm and mesoderm also extend beyond the limits of the embryo. These two layers of cells extend all along the inside of the eggshell, both over the embryo and below the yolk sac. Where they meet, they fuse, forming two membranes, the amnion and the chorion. The amnion, which is the inner membrane, surrounds the embryo, forming the amniotic cavity. The amnion secretes fluid into the cavity, providing an aqueous environment for the embryo. The outer membrane, the chorion, forms a continuous membrane just under the eggshell. It limits water loss from the egg and also mediates the exchange of respiratory gases between the embryo and the outside world. The fourth membrane to form, the allantoic membrane, is another outgrowth of the embryonic endoderm. It forms the allantois, a sac for storage of metabolic wastes. The allantois, in combination with the chorion, is also involved in respiratory gas exchange.43.5.2 Extraembryonic membranes in mammals form the placenta 768In mammals, the first extraembryonic membrane to form is the trophoblast, whichis already apparent by the fifth cell division. When the blastocyst reaches the uterus and "hatches" out of its encapsulating zona pellucida, the trophoblast cells interact directly with the endometrium. Adhesion molecules expressed on the surfaces of these cells attach them to the uterine wall, and by excreting proteolytic enzymes, the trophoblast burrows into the endometrium, beginning the process of implantation. Eventually. the entire trophoblast is within the wall of the uterus. The trophoblastic cells then send out numerous projections, or villi, to increase the surface area of contact with maternal blood. Meanwhile, the hypoblast cells extend to form what in the bird would be the yolk sac. But there is no yolk in placental mammalian eggs, so the yolk sac contributes mesodermal tissues that interact with trophoblast tissues to form the chorion. The chorion, along with tissues of the uterine wall, produces the placenta, the organ of nutrition for the embryo.At the same time the yolk sac is forming from the hypoblast, the epiblast produces the amnion, which grows to enclose the entire embryo in a fluid-filled amniotic cavity. The rupturing of the amnion and the loss of the amniotic fluid ("water breaking") herald the onset of labor in humans. An allantois also develops in mammals, but its importance depends on how well nitrogenous wastes can be transferred across the placenta. In humans the allantois is minor; in pigs it is important. In humans and other placental mammals, allantoic tissues contribute to the formation of the umbilical cord by which the embryo is attached to the chorionic placenta. It is through the blood vessels of the umbilical cord that nutrients and oxygen from the mother reach the developing fetus and wastes, including carbon dioxide and urea, are removed.43.5.3 The extraembryonic membranes provide means of detecting genetic diseases 768Cells slough off of the embryo and float in the amniotic fluid that bathes it. Later in development, a small sample of the amniotic fluid may be withdrawn with a needle as the first step of a process called amniocentesis. Some of these cells can be cultured and used for biochemical and genetic analyses that can reveal the sex of the fetus, as well as genetic markers for diseases such as cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs disease, and Down syndrome. If amniocentesis is performed, is usually not until after the fourteenth week of pregnancy, and the tests require two weeks to complete. If abnormalities in the fetus are detected, termination of the pregnancy at that stage would put the mother's health at greater risk than would an earlier abortion. Therefore a newer technique, called chorionic villus sampling, is now in common use. In this test a small sample of the tissue from the surface of the chorion is taken. This test can be done as early as the eighth week of pregnancy, and the results are available in several days. 43.6 Human Pregnancy and Birth 76943.6.1 Human pregnancy can be divided into three trimesters 769Gestation, or pregnancy, in humans has a duration of about 266 days, or 9 months. In smaller mammals gestation is shorter-for example, 21 days in mice-and in larger mammals it is longer-for example, 330 days in horses and 600 days in elephants. To follow the temporal sequence of events in human pregnancy, we can divide it into three trimesters of about 3 months each. Implantation of the human blastocyst begins on about the sixth day after fertilization. After implantation, the placenta develops and the tissues and organs of the embryo begin to differentiate. The human heart begins to beat in week 4, and limbs form by week 8. Most organs have started to form by the end of the first trimester. By the end of the first trimester, the embryo looks like a miniature version of the adult, and is called a fetus.Because the first trimester is a time of rapid cell division and differentiation, it is the period during which the embryo is most sensitive to radiation, drugs, and chemicals that can cause birth defects. An embryo can be damaged before the mother even knows she is pregnant. Hormonal changes cause major and noticeable responses in the mother during the first trimester, even though the fetus at the end of that time is still so small that it would fit into a teaspoon. Soon after the blastocyst implants itself, it begins to secrete human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), the hormone that stimulates the corpus luteum to continue producing estrogen and progesterone. The high levels of these hormones have negative feedback effects on the production and secretion of hypothalamic and pituitary hormones (see Chapter 42). These dramatic hormonal shifts cause the well-known symptoms of pregnancy: morning sickness, mood swings, changes in the senses of taste and smell, and swelling of the breasts.the second trimester. During the second trimester the fetus grows rapidly to a weight of about 600 g, and the mother's abdomen enlarges considerably. The limbs of the fetus elongate, and the fingers, toes, and facial features become well formed. Fetal movements are first felt by the mother early in the second trimester, and they become progressively stronger and more coordinated. By the end of the second trimester, the fetus may suck its thumb. The production of estrogen and progesterone by the placenta increases during the second trimester. As placental production of these hormones increases, the level of hCG decreases and the corpus luteum degenerates. Ovulation and menstruation are still inhibited by the steroids secreted by the placenta. Along with these hormonal changes, the unpleasant symptoms of early pregnancy usually disappear. The fetus and the mother continue to grow rapidly during the third trimester. As the fetus approaches its full size, pressure on the mother's internal organs can cause indigestion, constipation, frequent urination, shortness of breath, and swelling of the legs and ankles. Since the fourth week of pregnancy the heart of the fetus has been beating, and as the third trimester approaches its end, other internal organs mature. The digestive system begins to function, the liver stores glycogen, the kidneys produce urine, and the brain undergoes cycles of sleep and waking.43.6.2 Parturition is triggered by hormonal and mechanical stimuli 770Throughout pregnancy, the uterus periodically undergoes slow, weak, rhythmic contractions called Braxton Hicks contractions. These contractions become gradually stronger during the third trimester and are sometimes called false labor contractions. True labor contractions usually mark the beginning of childbirth, or parturition. Many factors contribute to the onset of labor. Both hormonal and mechanical stimuli increase the contractility of the uterus. Progesterone inhibits and estrogen stimulates contractions of uterine muscle. Toward the end of the third trimester, the estrogen-progesterone ratio shifts in favor of estrogen. Oxytocin stimulates uterine contraction; its secretion by the pituitaries of both mother and fetus increases at the time of labor.Mechanical stimuli come from the stretching of the uterus by the fully grown fetus and the pressure of the fetal head on the cervix. These mechanical stimuli increase the pituitary release of oxytocin, which in turn increases the activity of the uterine muscle, which causes even more pressure on the cervix. This positive feedback loop converts the weak, slow, rhythmic contractions of the uterus into stronger labor contractions. In the early stage of labor, the contractions of the uterus are 15 to 20 minutes apart, and each lasts 45 to 60 seconds. During this time, the contractions pull the cervix open until it is large enough to allow the baby to pass through. This stage of labor lasts an average of 12 to 15 hours in a first pregnancy and 8 hours or less in subsequent ones. Gradually the contractions become more frequent and more intense.The second stage of labor, called delivery, begins when the cervix is fully dilated. The baby's head moves into the vagina and becomes visible from the outside. The usual head-down position of the baby at the time of delivery comes about when the fetus shifts its orientation during the seventh month. If the fetus fails to move into the head-down position, a different part of the fetus enters the vagina first, and the birth is more difficult.Passage of the fetus through the vagina is assisted by the woman's bearing down with her abdominal and other muscles to help push the baby along. Once the head and shoulders of the baby clear the cervix, the rest of its body eases out rapidly, but it is still connected to the placenta in the mother by the umbilical cord. Delivery may take as little as a minute, or up to half an hour or more in a first pregnancy. As soon as the baby clears the birth canal, it can start breathing and become independent of its mother's circulation. The umbilical cord may then be clamped and cut. The segment still attached to the baby dries up and sloughs off in a few days, leaving behind its distinctive signature, the belly button-more properly called the umbilicus. The detachment and expulsion of the placenta and fetal membranes takes from a few minutes to an hour, and may be accompanied by uterine contractions. In humans, the completion of delivery is the start of many years of nurturing and care for the young organism. Many processes of development continue throughout childhood, and indeed, throughout life.44 Neurons and Nervous Systems"On your mark." "Get set." Bang! 10.75 seconds later Marion Jones crossed the finish line one hundred meters away, winning an Olympic gold medal. An amazing number of events took place in her nervous system during those 10.75 seconds. Cells in her ear converted the gunshot sound waves into bursts of electrical activity called  nerve impulses. The nerve impulses traveled along projections of nerve cells to a part of her brain that processes sound information. Nerve cells from that part of the brain carried nerve impulses to another part of the brain that commands and coordinates the movements of the body. Command cells controlling the muscles in her legs were triggered to fire bursts of nerve impulses. These cells carried the bursts of nerve impulses down the spinal cord to about the middle of her back region.  At that level of the spinal cord, connections were made to other command cells causing them to send nerve impulses to the muscles of Marion's legs and feet. Those muscles contracted and propelled her off the blocks. Each time a cell in this chain passed information to another cell, it released small packets of chemicals that stimulated the next cell to generate bursts of nerve impulses.All of these events took about a tenth of a second.  For the next  10.65 seconds, hundreds of thousands of nerve cells fired repeated bursts of nerve impulses in just the right patterns to cause the many muscles of Marion's legs, feet, arms, and torso to repeatedly contract and relax, powering the 80 or so strides it took her to reach the finish line. Each of the millions of cell-cell interactions that occurred involved a small release of chemicals from one cell and a receptor mediated response from another cell. What amazing complexity and precision-yet running 100 meters is a simple task for the nervous system (although very few people will ever do it as quickly as Marion Jones does).The nervous system is the most complex part of the human body. As in other organs and organ systems, its basic building blocks are cells. In the nervous system, cells are arranged in networks and circuits for the purpose of processing information. Within those circuits resides not only the capacity to generate immediate responses to stimuli impinging on the many sensory systems, but also the capacity to remember those stimuli and responses, to relate stimuli and responses to other experiences, and to learn from the information that is processed. Within the cells and connections of the nervous system reside our individualities, our personalities, our egos, and our abilities to love and to hate. Understanding the human nervous system is probably the biggest challenge in all of biology. Where do we start? With the basic building blocks: nerve cells. This chapter describes the cells of nervous systems. It then details how nerve cells generate electric signals and conduct those signals from place to place. Finally, it explains how those signals are communicated from cell to cell and how receiving cells respond. 44.1 Nervous Systems: Cells and Functions 773In multicellular animals, nerve cells, called neurons, are specialized to receive information, encode it, and transmit it to other cells. Together with their specialized supportive cells, neurons make up nervous systems, whose functions can be described in terms of networks of interacting neurons.44.1.1 Nervous systems process information 774Animals receive various kinds of information from both inside and outside their bodies. This information is received and converted, or transduced, by sensory cells (also called receptor cells) into electric signals that can be transmitted and processed by neurons. To cause behavioral or physiological responses, a nervous system communicates these signals to effectors, such as muscles and glands. A simple animal that remains fixed to its substrate, such as a sea anenome (a cnidarian), can process information with a simple network of neurons that does little more than provide direct lines of communication from sensory cells to effectors. The cnidarian's nerve net merely detects food or danger and causes its tentacles and body to extend or retract. More complex animals that move around the environment and hunt for food and mates need to process and integrate larger amounts of information. Even animals such as flatworms fit this description, and their increased need for information processing is met by clusters of neurons called ganglia. Ganglia serving different functions may be distributed around the body, as in the earthworm or the squid. Frequently one pair of ganglia is larger and more central than the others, and is therefore given the designation of brain.In vertebrates, most of the cells of the nervous system are found in the brain and the spinal cord, the site of most information processing, storage, and retrieval. Therefore, the brain and spinal cord are called the central nervous system (CNS). Information is transmitted from sensory cells to the CNS and from the CNS to effectors via neurons that extend or reside outside of the brain and the spinal cord; these neurons and their supporting cells are called the peripheral nervous system. Vertebrates have highly developed central nervous systems, but they vary greatly in behavioral complexity and physiological capabilities. But even small nervous systems are remarkably complex. Consider the nervous systems of small spiders that have programmed within them the thousands of precise movements necessary to construct a beautiful web without prior experience.44.1.2 Neurons are the functional units of nervous systems 775Although nervous systems vary enormously in structure and function, neurons function similarly in animals as different as squids and humans. Their plasma membranes generate electric signals-called nerve impulses or action potentials-and conduct these signals from one location on a cell to the most distant reaches of that cell-a distance that can be more than a meter. Most neurons have four regions-a cell body, dendrites, an axon, and axon terminals, but the variation among different types of neurons is considerable. The cell body contains the nucleus and most of the cell's organelles. Many projections may sprout from the cell body. Most of these projections are bushlike dendrites (from the Greek dendron, "tree"), which bring information from other neurons or sensory cells to the cell body. In most neurons, one projection is much longer than the others, and is called the axon. Axons usually carry information away from the cell body. The length of the axon differs in different types of neurons-some axons are remarkably long, such as those that run from the spinal cord to the toes. The degree of branching of the dendrites can also be quite different among types of neurons.Axons are the "telephone lines" of the nervous system. Information received by the dendrites can cause the cell body to generate a nerve impulse, which is then conducted along the axon to the cell that is its target. At the target cell-which can be another neuron, a muscle cell, or a gland cell-the axon divides into a spray of fine nerve endings. At the tip of each of these tiny nerve endings is a swelling called an axon terminal that comes very close to the target cell. Where an axon terminal comes close to another cell, the membranes of both cells are modified to form a synapse. In most cases, a space or cleft only about 25 nm wide separates the two membranes at the synapse. A nerve impulse arriving at an axon terminal causes molecules called neurotransmitters stored in the axon terminal to be released. The released neurotransmitters diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind receptors on the plasma membrane of the target cell. Thousands of synapses impinge on most individual neurons. A neuron generally receives information (synaptic inputs) from many sources before producing nerve impulses that travel down its single axon to target cells. We will discuss synaptic transmission in more detail later in the chapter.44.1.3 Glial cells are also important components of nervous systems 776Neurons are not the only type of cell in the nervous system. In fact, there are more glial cells than neurons in the human brain. Like neurons, glial cells come in several forms and have a diversity of functions. Some glial cells physically support and orient the neurons and help them make the right contacts during their embryonic development. Other glial cells insulate axons. In the peripheral nervous system, Schwann cells wrap around the axons of neurons, covering them with concentric layers of insulating plasma membrane. Other glial cells called oligodendrocytes perform a similar function in the central nervous system. The covering produced by Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes, called myelin, gives many parts of the nervous system a glistening white appearance. Later in the chapter we will see how the electrical insulation provided by myelin increases the speed with which axons can conduct nerve impulses. Glial cells are well known for the many housekeeping functions they perform. Some glial cells supply neurons with nutrients; others consume foreign particles and cell debris. Glial cells also help maintain the proper ionic environment around neurons. Although they have no axons and do not generate or conduct nerve impulses, some glial cells communicate with one another electrically through a special type of contact called a gap junction, a connection that enables ions to flow between cells.Glial cells called astrocytes (because they look like stars) contribute to the blood-brain barrier, which protects the brain from toxic chemicals in the blood. Blood vessels throughout the body are very permeable to many chemicals, including toxic ones, which would reach the brain if this special barrier did not exist. Astrocytes help form this barrier by surrounding the smallest, most permeable blood vessels in the brain. Protection of the brain is crucial because, unlike other tissues of the body, the brain has a limited capacity to recover from damage by generating new neurons and new neuronal connections. Throughout life, neurons are progressively lost. Without the blood-brain barrier, the rate of neuron loss could be much greater. However, the barrier is not perfect. Since it consists of plasma membranes, it is permeable to fat-soluble substances. Anesthetics and alcohol, both of which have well-known effects on the brain, are fat-soluble chemicals.44.1.4 Neurons function in networks 776As we learn more about the properties of neurons, it is important to keep in mind that nervous systems depend on neurons working together. The simplest neuronal network consists of three cells: a sensory neuron connected to a motor neuron connected to a muscle cell. Most of the neuronal networks that carry out the functions of the human nervous system are much more complex and consist of many more neurons. The human brain contains between 109 and 1011 neurons. Most of these neurons receive information from a thousand or more synapses. Thus there may be as many as 1014 synapses in the human brain. Therein lies the incredible ability of the brain to process information. This astronomical number of neurons and synapses is divided into thousands of distinct but interacting networks that function in parallel and accomplish the many different tasks of the nervous system. But before we can understand how even one of these circuits works, we must understand the properties of individual neurons. 44.2 Neurons:  Generating and Conducting Nerve Impulses 776In this section, we explore the electrical properties of cells. After reviewing some basic electrical concepts, we examine in detail the roles of ions, ion pumps, and ion channels in establishing and altering the electrical properties of neurons. These electrical changes generate action potentials, the language by which the nervous system processes and communicates information. The insides of cells are electrically negative in comparison to the outsides. The difference in voltage across the plasma membrane of a neuron is called its membrane potential. In an unstimulated neuron, this voltage difference is called a resting potential. Membrane potentials can be measured with electrodes. An electrode can be made from a glass pipette pulled to a very sharp tip and filled with a solution containing ions that conduct electric charge. Using such electrodes, we can record very tiny local electrical events that occur across plasma membranes. If a pair of electrodes is placed one on each side of the plasma membrane of a resting axon, they measure a voltage difference of about -60 millivolts (mV)-the resting potential.The resting potential provides a means for neurons to respond to a stimulus. A neuron is sensitive to any chemical or physical factor that causes a change in the resting potential across a portion of its plasma membrane. The most extreme change in membrane potential is a nerve impulse, which is a sudden and rapid reversal in the voltage across a portion of the plasma membrane. For a brief moment-1 or 2 milliseconds-the inside of a part of the cell becomes more positive than the outside. Nerve impulses are also called action potentials, a name that conveys their contrast with the resting potential. An action potential can travel along the plasma membrane from one part of a neuron to its farthest extensions.44.2.1 Simple electrical concepts underlie neuronal functions 777To understand how resting potentials are created, how they are perturbed, and how action potentials are generated and conducted along plasma membranes, it is necessary to know a little about electricity, ions, and the special ion channel proteins in the plasma membranes of neurons. Voltage (potential) is the tendency for electrically charged particles like electrons or ions to move between two points. Voltage is to the flow of electrically charged particles what pressure is to the flow of water. If the negative and the positive poles of a battery are connected by a copper wire, electrons flow from negative to positive because there is a voltage difference between them. This flow of electrons is an electric current, and it can be used to do work, just as a current of water can be used to do work such as turning a turbine. Electric charges move across cell membranes not as electrons, but as charged ions. The major ions that carry electric charges across the plasma membranes of neurons are sodium (Na+), chloride (Cl-), potassium (K+), and calcium (Ca2+). It is also important to remember that ions with opposite charges attract each other. With these basics of bioelectricity in mind, we can ask how the resting potential of the neuronal plasma membrane is created, and how the flow of ions through membrane channels is turned on and off to generate action potentials.44.2.2 Ion pumps and channels generate resting and action potentials 777The plasma membranes of neurons, like those of all other cells, are lipid bilayers that are impermeable to ions. However, these impermeable lipid bilayers contain many protein molecules that serve as ion channels and ion pumps. Ion pumps and channels are responsible for resting and action potentials. Ion pumps use energy to move ions or other molecules against their concentration gradients. The major ion pump in neuronal membranes is the sodium-potassium pump. The action of this pump expels Na+ ions from the cell, exchanging them for K+ ions from outside the cell. The sodium-potassium pump keeps the concentration of K+ inside the cell greater than that of the external medium, and the concentration of Na+ inside the cell less than that of the external medium. The concentration differences established by the pump mean that K+ would diffuse out of the cell and Na+ would diffuse into the cell if the ions could cross the lipid bilayer.Ion channels are pores formed by proteins in the lipid bilayer. These water-filled pores allow ions to pass through, but they cannot actively transport ions as ion pumps do. They are generally selective; that is, some types of ions pass through them more easily than others. Thus there are potassium channels, sodium channels, chloride channels, and calcium channels, and there are different kinds of each. Ions move through channels by diffusion, and therefore they can move in either direction. The direction and magnitude of net movement of ions through a channel depends on the concentration gradient of that ion type across the plasma membrane. Many ion channels in the plasma membranes of neurons behave as if they contain a "gate" that opens to allow ions to pass under some conditions, but closes under other conditions. Voltage-gated channels open or close in response to a change in the voltage across the plasma membrane. Chemically gated channels open or close depending on the presence or absence of a specific chemical that binds to the channel protein, or to a separate receptor that in turn alters the channel protein. Both voltage-gated and chemically gated channels play important roles in neuronal function.Potassium channels are the most common open channels in the plasma membranes of resting (non-stimulated) neurons. As a consequence, resting neurons are more permeable to K+ than to any other ion. This characteristic explains the resting potential. Because the plasma membrane is permeable to K+, and because the sodium-potassium pump keeps the concentration of K+ inside the cell much higher than that outside the cell, K+ tends to diffuse out of the cell through the potassium channels. As positively charged K+ ions diffuse out of the cell, they leave unbalanced negative charges behind, generating a membrane potential that tends to pull positively charged K+ ions back into the cell. The membrane potential at which the tendency of the K+ ions to diffuse out is balanced by the negative electric potential pulling them back in is called the potassium equilibrium potential. The value of the potassium equilibrium potential can be calculated from the concentrations of K+ ions on the two sides of the membrane from an equation (called the Nernst Equation) derived from the laws of physical chemistry. In general, the resting potential is a bit less negative than this potential predicts, bccause resting neurons are also slightly permeable to other ions, for example Na+ and Cl-.44.2.3 Ion channels can alter membrane potential 779Changes in the gated channels may perturb the resting potential. Imagine what would happen, for example, if sodium channels in the plasma membrane opened. Na+ ions would diffuse into the cell because of their higher concentration on the outside, and they would also be attracted into the cell by the negative membrane potential. As a result of the entry of Na+ ions, the inside of the cell would tend to become less negative. When the inside of a neuron becomes less negative in comparison to its resting condition, its plasma membrane is said to be depolarized. An opposite change in the resting potential would occur if gated Cl- channels opened. The concentration of Cl- ions is normally greater in the extracellular fluid than inside the neuron. This difference is large enough so that, in many neurons, the opening of Cl- channels causes Cl- to enter the cell, even though the membrane potential is negative. The entry of negative charges causes the membrane potential to become even more negative. When the inside of a neuron becomes more negative in comparison to its resting condition, its plasma membrane is said to be hyperpolarized.The opening and closing of ion channels, which result in changes in the polarity of the plasma membrane, are the basic mechanisms by which neurons respond to electrical, chemical, or other stimuli, such as touch, sound, and light. How does a neuron use a change in its resting membrane potential to process and transmit information? A change in resting potential  may result from input at a synapse. This input, however, is a very local event that affects only a small patch of plasma membrane. How can that information be passed to other parts of the cell? A local perturbation of membrane potential causes a flow of electrically charged ions, which tends to spread the change in membrane potential to adjacent regions of the membrane. This flow of electrically charged ions is an electric current. For example, if positively charged Na+ ions enter the cell through sodium channels at one location, that positively charged area on the inside of the membrane attracts negative charges from surrounding areas, and thus there is a flow of electric current. However, this local flow of electric current does not spread very far before it diminishes and disappears.The reason why electric currents do not travel very far in cell membranes is that these membranes are permeable to ions. An electric current traveling along a membrane is like water flowing through a leaky hose. Communication of a stimulus by the flow of electric current along plasma membranes is useful over only very short distances. Therefore, axons, the long processes of neurons, do not transmit information as a continuous flow of electric current (as telephone wires do). However, the local flow of electric current is an important part of the mechanism that generates the signals that axons do transmit over long distances: action potentials.44.2.4 Sudden changes in ion channels generate action potentials 780An action potential is a sudden and major change in membrane potential that lasts for only 1 or 2 milliseconds. Action potentials are conducted along the axon of a neuron at speeds of up to 100 meters per second, which is equivalent to running the length of a football field in 1 second. How is an action potential generated, and how does it move down an axon? If we place the tips of a pair of electrodes on either side of the plasma membrane of a resting axon and measure the voltage difference, the reading is about -60 mV. If these electrodes are in place when an action potential travels down the axon, they register a rapid change in membrane potential, from -60 mV to about +50 mV. The membrane potential rapidly returns to its resting level of -60 mV as the action potential passes.Voltage-gated sodium channels in the plasma membrane of the axon are primarily responsible for action potentials. At the normal membrane resting potential, most of these channels are closed. They are called voltage-gated channels because there is a particular membrane potential, or threshold potential, that causes them to open. For example, if synaptic input to some part of a neuron causes the plasma membrane of its cell body to depolarize, that depolarization can spread to the base of the axon, where there are voltage-gated sodium channels. When the plasma membrane containing these channels is depolarized to their threshold potential (about 5 to 10 mV more positive than the resting potential), they open briefly-for less than a millisecond. The Na+ concentration is much higher outside the axon than inside, so when the sodium channels open, Na+ ions from the outside rush into the axon. The entering Na+ ions make the inside of the plasma membrane electrically positive. The opening of the sodium channels causes the rising phase of the action potential, which neurobiologists call the spike.What causes the depolarized axon to return to resting potential? The main reason is the rapid closing of the sodium channels. Some axons also have voltage-gated potassium channels. These channels open more slowly than the sodium channels and they stay open longer, allowing K+ ions to carry excess positive charges out of the axon. As a result, they help return the voltage across the membrane to its resting level. Another feature of the voltage-gated sodium channels is that once they open and close, they can be triggered again only after a short delay of 1 to 2 milliseconds. This property can be explained by the assumption that they have two voltage-sensitive gates, an activation gate and an inactivation gate. Under resting conditions, the activation gate is closed and the inactivation gate is open. Depolarization of the membrane to the threshold level causes both gates to change state, but the activation gate responds faster. As a result, the channel is open for the passage of Na+ ions for a brief time between the opening of the activation gate and the closing of the inactivation gate. The inactivation gate remains closed for 1-2 milliseconds before it spontaneously opens again, thus explaining why the membrane has a refractory period (a period during which it cannot act) before it can fire another action potential. When the inactivation gate finally opens, the activation gate is closed, and the membrane is poised to respond once again to a depolarizing stimulus by firing another action potential.The difference in concentration of Na+ ions across the plasma membrane of neurons is the "battery" that drives the action potential. How rapidly does the battery run down? It might seem that a substantial number of Na+ and K+ ions would have to cross the membrane for the membrane potential to change from -60 mV to +50 mV and back to -60 mV again. In fact, only about one Na+ (or K+) ion for every 10 million present actually moves through the channels during the passage of an action potential. Thus the effect of a single action potential on the concentration ratios of Na+ or K+ is very small, and it is not difficult for the sodium-potassium pump to keep the "battery" charged, even when the cell is generating many action potentials every second.44.2.5 Action potentials are conducted down axons without reduction in the signal 781Action potentials can travel over long distances with no loss of the signal. If we place two pairs of electrodes at two different locations along an axon, we can record an action potential at those two locations as it travels down the axon. The magnitude of the action potential does not change between the two recordings. The reason is that the action potential is an all-or-nothing, self-regenerating event. The action potential is all-or-nothing because of the interaction between the voltage-gated sodium channels and the membrane potential. If the membrane is depolarized slightly and approaches the threshold potential for voltage-gated sodium channels, some of them open. When that happens, some Na+ ions cross the plasma membrane and depolarize it even more, bringing more voltage-gated sodium channels to threshold, and so on. This positive feedback mechanism ensures that action potentials always rise to their maximum value. They are all-or-nothing events. The action potential is self-regenerating because it spreads by current flow to adjacent regions of the membrane.The resulting depolarization brings those areas of plasma membrane to the threshold potential for the voltage-gated Na+ channels. So when an action potential occurs at one location on an axon, it stimulates the adjacent region of axon to generate an axon potential, and so on down the length of the axon. Let's take a closer look at how all-or-nothing, self-regenerating action potentials travel down axons. We can initiate an action potential by shocking an axon with an electric current delivered through a stimulating electrode that depolarizes the membrane enough to reach threshold. Now we can observe the changes in membrane potential associated with the passage of that action potential past the recording electrodes. Positive ions flood into the axon at the site of the action potential. Once they are inside the axon, those positive ions spread by current flow to adjacent regions of the axon, making those regions less negative. As this depolarization of the adjacent plasma membrane brings it to the threshold potential for the opening of voltage-gated sodium channels, an action potential is generated there. Because an action potential always brings the adjacent area of membrane to threshold, the action potential is self-regenerating and propagates itself along the axon. The action potential propagates itself in only one direction, however; it cannot reverse itself, because the part of the membrane it came from is in its refractory period. Action potentials do not travel along all axons at the same speed. They travel faster in large-diameter axons than in small-diameter axons. In invertebrates, the axon diameter determines the rate of conduction, and axons that transmit messages involved in escape behavior are very thick. The axons that enable squid to escape predators are almost 1 mm in diameter. These giant axons were used in the classic studies that discovered the ionic events of action potentials and their conduction.44.2.6 Ion channels and their properties can be studied directly 783The size of the squid giant axon made it possible for the British neurophysiologists A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley to study the electrical properties of axonal membranes 60 years ago. They used thin electrodes to measure voltage differences across the plasma membrane of the squid giant axon and to pass electric current into the axon to change its resting potential. They also changed the concentrations of Na+ and K+ ions both inside and outside the axon and measured the changes in resting and action potentials. On the basis of their many careful experiments, Hodgkin and Huxley developed the whole story we have discussed so far, explaining resting potentials and action potentials in terms of Na+ and K+ ion channels in the plasma membrane. However, they were working long before technology enabled the actual demonstration of ion channels. Hodgkin and Huxley could only hypothesize the existence of ion channels and their properties. With current techniques, neurobiologists can record currents caused by the openings and closings of single ion channels directly. A technique called patch clamping, developed in the 1980s by Bert Sakmann and Erwin Neher, made possible the study of single ion channels in plasma membranes. In patch clamping, a glass pipette with a tip only 1 or 2 microns in diameter is placed in contact with the plasma membrane. Slight suction makes a seal between the pipette and the patch of membrane under its tip. Retracting the pipette can detach a bit of plasma membrane. Movements of ions, and therefore electric charges, through channels in the patch of membrane can be recorded through the pipette. Frequently, a patch will contain only one or a few ion channels; thus the electrical recording from that patch can show individual channels opening and closing. Neher and Sakmann received the Nobel prize in 1991 for their invention (28 years after Hodgkin and Huxley received theirs).44.2.7 Action potentials can jump down axons 784In nervous systems that are more complex than those of invertebrates, increasing the speed of action potentials by increasing the diameter of axons is not feasible because of the huge number of axons that are required. Each of our eyes, for example, has about a million axons extending from it. Evolution has increased propagation velocity in vertebrate axons in a way that does not require large size. When we discussed glial cells earlier in the chapter, we saw that glial cells of one type, called Schwann cells, send out projections that wrap around axons, covering them with concentric layers of plasma membrane. These myelin wrappings are not continuous, but have regularly spaced gaps called nodes of Ranvier where the axon is not covered. Myelin electrically insulates the axon; that is, charged ions cannot cross the regions of the plasma membrane that are wrapped in myelin. Additionally, ion channels are clustered at the nodes. Thus, an axon can fire an action potential only at a node of Ranvier, but that action potential cannot be conducted through the adjacent patch of axon covered with myelin. The positive charges that flow into the axon at the node, however, spread down the axon. When the spread of current causes the plasma membrane at the next node to depolarize to threshold, an action potential is fired at that node. Action potentials therefore appear to jump from node to node down the axon. The speed of conduction is increased in these myelin-wrapped axons because electric current flows very fast through the cytoplasm in comparison to the time required for channels to open and close. This form of impulse propagation is called saltatory (jumping) conduction and is much quicker than continuous propagation of action potentials down an unmyelinated axon.You have probably experienced the difference in the velocity at which action potentials travel down myelinated and unmyelinated axons. If you touch a very hot or very cold object, you experience a sharp pain before you sense whether the object is hot or cold. With the sensing of the temperature also comes a burning pain different from the first sharp pain. The sensory axons that carry sharp-pain sensation are myelinated, but most axons carrying information about temperature, as well as axons carrying the sensation of burning, aching pain, are unmyelinated. As a result, you know that something is wrong before you know what it is or how bad it is. The unmyelinated temperature and burning-pain axons conduct impulses at only 1 to 2 m/s, whereas the myelinated sharp-pain axons conduct impulses at velocities of up to 5 or 6 m/s. The largest myelinated axons in the human nervous system-such as those controlling human leg muscles, as we saw at the beginning of the chapter-conduct impulses at velocities of over 100 meters per second. 44.3 Neurons, Synapses, and Communication 785The most remarkable abilities of nervous systems stem from interactions among connected neurons. These interactions process and integrate information. Our nervous systems can orchestrate complex behaviors, deal with complex concepts, and learn and remember because large numbers of neurons interact with one another. The mechanisms of these interactions depend on synapses between cells. Synapses are structurally specialized junctions where one cell influences another cell directly through the transfer of an electrical or chemical message. The cell that sends the message is called the presynaptic cell, and the cell that receives it is called the postsynaptic cell. The most common type of synapse in the nervous system is the chemical synapse-one in which chemical messages released by a presynaptic cell induce changes in a postsynaptic cell.In this section, we examine the specializations and functions of presynaptic and the postsynaptic cells. We discover how synapses can integrate  information, and at the end of the section we examine the diversity of chemical messages released by neurons.44.3.1 The neuromuscular junction is a classic chemical synapse 785Synapses between motor neurons and muscle cells are called neuromuscular junctions, and they are excellent models for how chemical synaptic transmission works. Like other neurons, the motor neuron that innervates a muscle has only one axon, but that axon can have many branches, each with an axon terminal that forms a neuromuscular junction with a muscle cell. At each axon terminal is an enlarged knob or buttonlike structure that contains many spherical vesicles filled with chemical messenger molecules, or neurotransmitters. The neurotransmitter used by all neurons that innervate vertebrate skeletal muscle is actetylcholine. The portion of the axon terminal plasma membrane that forms a synapse with a muscle cell is called the presynaptic membrane. Acetylcholine is released by exocytosis when the membrane of a vesicle fuses with the presynaptic membrane. Where does the neurotransmitter come from? Some neurotransmitters, like acetylcholine, are synthesized in the axon terminal and packaged in vesicles.The enzymes required for acetylcholine biosynthesis, however, are produced in the cell body of the motor neuron and are transported down the axon to the terminals along microtubules. Some other kinds of neurotransmitters, such as peptide neurotransmitters, are produced in the cell body and transported down the axon to the terminals.The postsynaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junction is a modified part of the muscle cell plasma membrane called a motor end plate. The space between the presynaptic membrane and the postsynaptic membrane is the synaptic cleft. In chemical synapses, the synaptic cleft is, on average, about 20-40 nm wide, and the neurotransmitter released into the cleft diffuses across to the postsynaptic membrane. The patches of muscle cell plasma membrane that form a motor end plate contain acetylcholine receptor molecules. These receptors function as chemically gated channels that allow both Na+ and K+ ions to pass through. Since the resting membrane is already fairly permeable to K+ ions, the major change that occurs when these channels open is the movement of Na+ ions into the cell. When a receptor binds acetylcholine, its channel opens, and Na+ ions move across the membrane, depolarizing the motor end plate. The action of acetylcholine is limited by the presence of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which is found in the synaptic cleft. This powerful enzyme cleaves any acetylcholine molecules it encounters. Thus, the activity of the neuromuscular junction is a balance between the release of acetylcholine by the presynaptic membrane and its destruction by acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic cleft. The breakdown products of neurotransmitter degradation are taken up by the presynaptic terminal and resynthesized into acetylcholine.44.3.2 The arrival of an action potential causes the release of neurotransmitter 786Neurotransmitter is released from the presynaptic membrane when an action potential arrives at the axon terminal. The presynaptic membrane has a type of voltage-gated ion channel found nowhere else on the axon: a voltage-gated calcium channel. When the action potential reaches the axon terminal, it causes these calcium channels to open. Because Ca2+ ions are in greater concentration outside the cell than inside the cell, they rush in. The increase in Ca2+ inside the presynaptic cell causes the vesicles containing acetylcholine to fuse with the presynaptic membrane and empty their contents into the synaptic cleft. The acetylcholine molecules diffuse across the cleft and bind to the receptors on the motor end plate, causing the sodium channels to open briefly and depolarize it.44.3.3 The postsynaptic membrane integrates synaptic input 786The postsynaptic membranes of neuromuscular junctions differ from the presynaptic membranes in an important way. Motor end plates have very few voltage-gated sodium channels; therefore, they do not fire action potentials. This is true not only of motor end plates, but also of dendrites and of most regions of neuronal cell bodies. The binding of neurotransmitter to receptors at the motor end plate and the resultant opening of chemically gated ion channels perturb the resting potential of the postsynaptic membrane. This local change in membrane potential spreads to neighboring regions of the plasma membrane of the postsynaptic cell. Eventually, the spreading depolarization may reach an area of membrane that does contain voltage-gated channels. The entire plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber, except for the motor end plates, has voltage-gated sodium channels. If the axon terminal of a motor neuron releases sufficient amounts of neurotransmitter to depolarize a motor end plate enough to bring the surrounding membrane to threshold, an action potential is fired. This action potential is then conducted throughout the muscle cell's system of membranes, causing the cell to contract. (We'll learn more about muscle membrane action potentials and the contraction of muscle cells in Chapter 47.) How much neurotransmitter is enough? Neither a single acetylcholine molecule nor the contents of an entire vesicle (about 10,000 acetylcholine molecules) are enough to bring the plasma membrane of a muscle cell to threshold. However, a single action potential in an axon terminal releases about 100 vesicles, which is enough to fire an action potential in the muscle cell and cause it to contract.44.3.4 Synapses between neurons can be excitatory or inhibitory 786In vertebrates, the synapses between motor neurons and skeletal muscle are always excitatory; that is, motor end plates always respond to acetylcholine by depolarizing the postsynaptic membrane. However, synapses between neurons can be either excitatory or inhibitory. Recall that a neuron may have many dendrites. Axon terminals from many neurons may make synapses with those dendrites and with the cell body. The axon terminals of different presynaptic neurons may store and release different neurotransmitters, and membranes of the dendrites and cell body of a postsynaptic neuron may have receptors for a variety of neurotransmitters. Thus a postsynaptic neuron can receive various chemical messages. If the postsynaptic neuron's response to a neurotransmitter is depolarization, as at the neuromuscular junction, the synapse is excitatory; if the response is hyperpolarization, the synapse is inhibitory. How do inhibitory synapses work? In vertebrates, the two most common inhibitory neurotransmitters are ?-amino butyric acid (GABA) and glycine. The postsynaptic cells at inhibitory synapses have chemically gated chloride channels. When these channels are activated by a neurotransmitter, they can hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane. Thus the release of neurotransmitter at an inhibitory synapse makes the postsynaptic cell less likely to fire an action potential. Neurotransmitters that depolarize the postsynaptic membrane are excitatory; they bring about an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). Neurotransmitters that hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane are inhibitory; they bring about an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP).44.3.5 The postsynaptic membrane sums excitatory and inhibitory input 787Individual neurons "decide" whether or not to fire an action potential by summing excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. This summation ability of neurons is the major mechanism by which the nervous system integrates information. Each neuron may receive 1,000 or more synaptic inputs, but it has only one output: an action potential in a single axon. All the information contained in the thousands of inputs a neuron receives is reduced to the rate at which that neuron generates action potentials in its axon. For most neurons, the critical area for "decision making" is the axon hillock, the region of the cell body at the base of the axon. The plasma membrane of the axon hillock is not insulated by glial cells and has many voltage-gated channels. Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials from synapses anywhere on the dendrites or the cell body spread to the axon hillock by current flow. If the resulting combined potential depolarizes the axon hillock to threshold, the axon fires an action potential. Because postsynaptic potentials decrease as they spread from the site of the synapse, all postsynaptic potentials do not have equal influences on the axon hillock. A synapse at the end of a dendrite has less influence than a synapse on the cell body near the axon hillock.Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials can be summed over space or over time. Spatial summation adds up the simultaneous influences of synapses at different sites on the postsynaptic cell. Temporal summation adds up postsynaptic potentials generated at the same site in a rapid sequence. All the neuron-to-neuron synapses that we have discussed up to now are between the axon terminals of a presynaptic cell and the cell body or dendrites of a postsynaptic cell. Synapses can also form between the axon terminals of one neuron and the axon terminals of another neuron. Such a synapse can modulate how much neurotransmitter the second neuron releases in response to action potentials traveling down its axon. We refer to this mechanism of regulating synaptic strength as presynaptic excitation or presynaptic inhibition.44.3.6 There are two types of neurotransmitter receptors 788Most neurotransmitter receptors induce changes in postsynaptic cells by opening or closing ion channels. How they do so is the basis for grouping receptors into two general families. Ionotropic receptors are themselves ion channels. Neurotransmitter binding by an ionotropic receptor causes a direct change in ion movements across the postsynaptic cell membrane. Metabotropic receptors are not ion channels, but they induce changes in the postsynaptic cell that can secondarily lead to changes in ion channels. Postsynaptic cell responses mediated by metabotropic receptors are generally slower and longer-lasting than those induced by ionotropic receptors. The acetylcholine (ACh) receptor of the motor end plate of muscle cells is an example of an ionotropic receptor. This receptor is called the nicotinic ACh receptor because it also binds the drug nicotine. The receptor consists of five subunits, each of which extends through the plasma membrane. When assembled, the subunits create a central pore that is the ion channel. There are several different kinds of subunits, and only one kind has the ability to bind ACh or nicotine. Each functional receptor-ion channel has two of the nicotine-binding subunits and three other subunits. There are also neuronal nicotinic ACh receptors, which are somewhat different in their subunit composition.Metabotropic receptors are also transmembrane proteins, but instead of acting as ion channels, they initiate an intracellular signaling process that can result in the opening or closing of an ion channel. These receptors have seven transmembrane domains, and they are coupled to G proteins. When a neurotransmitter binds to the extracellular domain of a metabotropic receptor, the intracellular domain activates a G protein. In its inactive state, the G protein has three subunits, one of which (the ? subunit) is bound to a molecule of GDP. When the receptor binds its neurotransmitter, the GDP is replaced with a GTP molecule, and the ? subunit separates from the other two subunits (called ? and ??. The separated subunits move across the membrane to where they can either directly activate an ion channel or activate an intermediate effector protein that eventually activates the ion channel. An example of a metabotropic receptor is the muscarinic ACh receptor, so called because it binds both ACh and a molecule called muscarine that is a toxin in some poisonous mushrooms. Muscarinic ACh receptors are found in heart muscle. When activated, they cause the opening of potassium channels, which slows the heartbeat. Metabotropic receptors can induce intracellular changes other than the opening or closing of ion channels. G proteins can activate a number of intracellular second messenger systems. Through these signaling pathways, the metabotropic receptor can activate protein kinases, activate or inactivate enzymes, and alter gene expression.44.3.7 Electrical synapses are fast but do not integrate information well 789Electrical synapses, or gap junctions, are different from chemical synapses because they couple neurons electrically. At gap junctions, the presynaptic and postsynaptic cell membranes are separated by a space of only 2 to 3 nm, and specific membrane proteins called connexons link the two neurons by forming molecular tunnels between the two cells. Ions and small molecules can pass directly from cell to cell through the connexons. Electrical transmission across gap junctions is very fast and can proceed in either direction; that is, stimulation of either neuron can result in an action potential in the other. In contrast, chemical synapses are slower, and they are unidirectional. Gap junctions are less common in the complex nervous systems of vertebrates than are chemical synapses for several reasons. First, electrical continuity between neurons does not allow temporal summation of synaptic inputs, which is one way that complex nervous systems integrate information. Second, an effective electrical synapse requires a large area of contact between the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. This condition rules out the possibility of thousands of synaptic inputs to a single neuron-which is the norm in complex nervous systems. Third, electrical synapses cannot be inhibitory. Finally, there appears to be little plasticity (modifiability) in electrical synapses. Thus, electrical synapses are good for rapid communication, but not for processes of integration and learning.44.3.8 The action of a neurotransmitter depends on the receptor to which it binds 789More than 25 neurotransmitters are now recognized, and more will surely be discovered. Table 4_1 gives some examples. Acetylcholine, as we have seen, is an important neurotransmitter because it is the means whereby nerves command skeletal muscles to contract. Acetylcholine also plays roles in certain synapses between neurons in the central nervous system, but it accounts for only a small percentage of the total neurotransmitter content of the CNS. The workhorse neurotransmitters of the CNS are simple amino acids: glutamate (excitatory) and glycine and GABA (inhibitory). Another important group of neurotransmitters in the CNS is the monoamines, which are derivatives of amino acids. They include dopamine and norepinephrine (derivatives of tyrosine) and serotonin (a derivative of tryptophan). Peptides also function as neurotransmitters. An exciting recent discovery revealed that two gases, carbon monoxide and nitric oxide, are used by neurons as intercellular messengers even though they do not have the characteristics of classic neurotransmitters (that is, they do not have receptors).The complexity of neurotransmission is increased by the fact that each neurotransmitter has multiple receptor types. We have already seen that acetylcholine has two well-known receptor types, nicotinic and muscarinic, one being ionotropic and the other metabotropic. Both types of ACh receptors are found in the CNS, where nicotinic receptors tend to be excitatory and muscarinic receptors tend to be inhibitory. ACh actions can differ outside of the CNS as well. ACh acting through nicotinic receptors causes the smooth muscle of the gut to depolarize and therefore increases its motility, but ACh acting through muscarinic receptors causes cardiac muscle to hyperpolarize and therefore decreases the contractility of the heart. We could give many more examples of neurotransmitters that have different effects in different tissues, but the important thing to remember is that the action of a neurotransmitter depends on the receptor to which it binds.44.3.9 Glutamate receptors may be involved in learning and memory 789Glutamate can bind to a variety of receptors, including metabotropic receptors that activate G proteins and ionotropic receptors that are directly linked to ion channels that open when the receptor binds glutamate. The glutamate receptors are divided into several classes because they are differentially activated by other chemicals that mimic the action of glutamate. One class of ionotropic glutamate receptor is the NMDA receptor; they can be activated by the chemical N-methyl-D-aspartate. Another class of ionotropic glutamate receptors is activated by a different chemical, abbreviated as AMPA. Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, so activation of all glutamate receptors results in sodium entry into the neuron and depolarization. But the timing of the response to activation of these different types of receptors differs significantly. The AMPA receptors, for example, allow a rapid influx of Na+ into the postsynaptic cell. The NMDA receptors allow a slower and longer-lasting influx of Na+. The NMDA receptors also require the cell to be somewhat depolarized through the action of other receptors before they will open channels and permit Na+ influx. When they do respond, the channels they open they also allow Ca2+ ions to enter the cell. Ca2+ ions act as second messengers in the cell and can trigger a variety of long-term cellular changes. The AMPA and the NMDA receptors can work in concert. The critical difference is that at normal resting potential, the NMDA channel is blocked by a magnesium ion (Mg2+). Slight depolarization of the neuron due to other inputs displaces the Mg2+ ions from the NMDA channels and allows Na+ and Ca2+ ions to pass through the channels when they are activated by glutamate. These special properties of the NMDA receptor are probably involved in learning and memory.Most of the synaptic events we have studied so far happen very quickly. It is therefore a special challenge to understand how the messages carried by action potentials can result in long-term events such as learning and memory. Our understanding of these processes has been greatly affected by a phenomenon called long-term potentiation, or LTP, that was discovered by neurobiologists working with slices of brain that they kept alive in dishes of culture medium. Using these brain slice preparations, it is possible to stimulate and record from specific brain regions, or even specific cells. In the studies leading to the discovery of LTP, experimenters repeatedly stimulated the synaptic inputs to a particular neuron and observed the usual action potential response. When the neuron was stimulated repeatedly in rapid succession, however, they found that the properties of the responding neuron changed. The size of the postsynaptic response was enhanced, or potentiated, and this change lasted for days or weeks.How does this potentiation occur? The answer in some areas of the brain now seems quite clear. With low levels of stimulation, the glutamate released by presynaptic cells activates only the AMPA receptors, and the postsynaptic cell simply responds with action potentials. With higher levels of stimulation, however, the NMDA receptor is activated, allowing both Na+ and Ca2+ ions to enter the postsynaptic neuron. The Ca2+ ions induce long-term changes in the postsynaptic neuron that make it more sensitive to synaptic input. Exploiting the LTP system, Dr. Joe Tsien and his students and collaborators at Princeton University have made mice smarter by increasing the ability of their NMDA receptors to induce long-term changes in synaptic transmission. The experimenters genetically engineered mice so that their NMDA receptors had a slightly altered structure and were activated for a longer time whenever they bound a molecule of glutamate. The mice with these altered NMDA receptors learned tasks better, ran mazes faster, and remembered the mazes longer than normal mice. Maybe the world does not need smarter mice, but these exciting experiments confirm that we are on the right track to understanding how the brain achieves learning and memory.44.3.10 Neuropharmacology depends on drugs that bind to specific receptors 791The variety of receptors and the specificity of their actions make it possible to develop drugs that can enhance or block the actions of neurotransmitters. Many of these drugs were discovered as secondary compounds produced by plants. The drug curare, for example, is extracted from South American vines and used to make poisoned darts and arrows for hunting. It binds to nicotinic ACh receptors, but does not activate them nearly as much as ACh does. Therefore, the skeletal muscles of an animal poisoned by curare cannot respond to motor neurons. The animal goes into flaccid (relaxed) paralysis and dies because its respiratory muscles stop contracting. Curare is used medically to treat severe muscle spasms and to prevent muscle contractions that would interfere with surgery. Another compound, atropine, which is extracted from the plant Atropa belladonna, binds to muscarinic ACh receptors and prevents ACh from activating them. Atropine is used medically to increase heart rate, decrease secretions of digestive juices, and decrease spasms of the gut. Eye doctors use atropine to dilate pupils for eye examinations. In the past, atropine was used cosmetically to make the eyes look big and dark-hence the plant species name belladonna, meaning "beautiful lady." The ability of compounds extracted from plants and animals to bind to certain neurotransmitter receptors is the basis for neuropharmacology, the study and development of drugs that influence the nervous system. Natural products are still an important source of drugs, but today many drugs are designed and synthesized by chemists. A major group of drugs called benzodiazepines, for example, which are used as tranquilizers, muscle relaxants, and sleeping pills, are synthetic molecules that act on GABA receptors, open Cl- channels, hyperpolarize cells, and inhibit neural activity.44.3.11 To turn off responses, synapses must be cleared of neurotransmitter 792Turning off the action of neurotransmitters is as important as turning it on. If released neurotransmitter molecules simply remained in the synaptic cleft, the postsynaptic membrane would become saturated with neurotransmitter, and receptors would be constantly bound. As a result, the postsynaptic cell would remain hyperpolarized or depolarized and would be unresponsive to short-term changes in the presynaptic cell. The more discrete each separate neural signal is, the more information can be processed in a given time. Thus, neurotransmitter must be cleared from the synaptic cleft shortly after it is released by the axon terminal. Neurotransmitter action may be terminated in several ways. First, enzymes may destroy the neurotransmitter. As we have seen, acetylcholine is rapidly destroyed by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which is present in the synaptic cleft in close association with the acetylcholine receptors on the postsynaptic membrane. Some of the most deadly nerve gases that were developed for chemical warfare work by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase. As a result, acetylcholine lingers in the synaptic clefts, causing the victim to die of spastic (contracted) muscle paralysis. Some agricultural insecticides, such as malathion, also inhibit acetylcholinesterase and can poison farm workers if used without safety precautions. Second, neurotransmitter may simply diffuse away from the cleft. Third, neurotransmitter may be taken up via active transport by nearby cell membranes. The mode of action of Prozac, a commonly prescribed drug for depression, is to slow the reuptake of the neurotransmitter serotonin, thus enhancing its activity at the synapse. 44.4 Neurons in Networks 794Because neurons can interact in the complex ways we have just discussed, networks of neurons can process and integrate information. Multiple neuronal networks constitute the nervous systems of animals. In subsequent chapters, we will see many examples of how neurons work together in networks to accomplish specific tasks. These networks use all of the mechanisms we have discussed: excitatory and inhibitory synapses, presynaptic excitation and inhibition, and mechanisms of long-term potentiation (and depression). Through these operations, our brains solve puzzles, create inventions, remember experiences, fall in love, and learn about biology. The challenge for the future is to understand how these networks work.45 Sensory SystemsAnimals perceive the world through their senses. Different species look through different sensory windows, so their views of the world are not the same. Dogs, for example, do not see color well, but they have keener senses of hearing and smell than humans do. While you enjoy a beautiful sunset, your dog might be enjoying sniffing around in the bushes and listening for the sounds of small animals in the underbrush. Human hunters have exploited the remarkable sensory abilities of dogs for thousands of years. Most recently that hunting has extended to illicit drugs, smuggled contraband, bombs, and firearms. Dogs can be trained to detect the signature odors of such items, so they are used by police, customs agents, and other investigators to identify those odors wherever suspicious activities are occurring. A black Labrador named Charlie (badge number K9-001) was the first dog trained by the U.S. Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms to sniff out firearms and explosives. Charlie has sniffed out more than 200 illegal guns and 500 pounds of hidden explosives. With a nose that outperforms electronic sensors, Charlie helped solve a terrorist bombing case by discovering a tiny fragment of the bomb hundreds of yards from the site of the explosion. Charlie's nose is never off duty; on a recreational visit to a U.S. Civil War battlefield, it smelled out cannonball fragments that had been buried for 130 years. ATF dogs receive a lot of expert training, but their careers are based on their remarkable sense of smell. In this chapter, we look at the general properties of sensory cells and see how they convert environmental stimuli to neural information. Sensory cells are generally called receptors, which creates some confusion with the receptor proteins that bind signaling molecules. To avoid this confusion, we use the terms sensory cells or receptor cells in this chapter. We examine in detail the cells responsible for chemoreception, mechanoreception, and photoreception and see how they are incorporated into sensory systems that provide the CNS with information about the world around and within us. In the course of our study of sensory systems, we will learn about the unusual sensory abilities of many animals. 45.1 Sensory Cells, Sensory Organs, and TransductionSensory cells transduce (convert) physical or chemical stimuli into signals that are transmitted to other parts of the nervous system for processing and interpretation. Most sensory cells are modified neurons, but some are other types of cells closely associated with neurons. Sensory cells are specialized for detecting specific kinds of stimuli, such as pressure, heat, or light. Most sensory cells possess a membrane receptor protein that detects the stimulus and responds by altering the flow of ions across the plasma membrane. The resulting change in membrane potential causes the sensory cell either to fire action potentials itself or to change its secretion of neurotransmitter onto an associated cell that fires action potentials. The intensity of the stimulus is encoded in the frequency of action potentials.45.1.1 Sensation depends on which neurons in the CNS receive action potentials from sensory cellsIf the messages derived from all sensory cells are the same-action potentials-how can we perceive different sensations? Sensations such as heat, itch, pressure, pain, light, smell, and sound differ because the messages from sensory cells arrive at different places in the central nervous system (CNS). Action potentials arriving in the visual cortex are interpreted as light, in the auditory cortex as sound, in the olfactory bulb as smell, and so forth. A small patch of skin on your arm contains sensory cells that increase their firing rates when the skin is warmed. Others increase their activity when the skin is cooled. Other types of sensory cells in the same patch of skin respond to touch, movement of hairs, irritants such as mosquito bites, and pain from cuts or burns. These sensory cells in your arm transmit their messages through axons that enter the CNS through the spinal cord. The synapses made by those axons in the spinal cord and the subsequent pathways of transmission determine whether the stimulation of the patch of skin on your arm is perceived as warmth, cold, pain, touch, itch, or tickle.The specificity of these sensory circuits is dramatically illustrated in persons who have had a limb or part of a limb amputated. Although the sensory cells from that region are gone, the axons that communicated information from those sensory cells to the CNS may remain. If those axons are stimulated, the person feels specific sensations as if they were coming from the limb that is no longer there-a phantom limb. The messages from some sensory cells communicate information about internal conditions in the body, but we may not be consciously aware of that information. The brain receives continuous information about body temperature, blood sugar, blood carbon dioxide and oxygen concentration, arterial pressure, muscle tension, and the position of the limbs. All this information is important for the maintenance of homeostasis, but we don't have to think about it. If we did, there would be no time to think about anything else. All sensory cells produce information that the nervous system can use, but that information does not always result in conscious sensation.45.1.2 Sensory organs are specialized for detecting specific stimuliSome sensory cells are assembled with other types of cells into sensory organs, such as eyes, ears, and noses, that enhance the ability of the sensory cells to collect, filter, and amplify stimuli. A photoreceptor cell, for example, detects electromagnetic radiation of only a particular range of wavelengths. This selectivity is the basis for color vision and explains why some insects can see ultraviolet light. In some simple organisms photoreceptors sense only the presence of light, but in more complex animals, photoreceptors are combined with other cell types into eyes. We'll learn how eyes collect light and focus it onto sheets of photoreceptors so that patterns of light can be detected.45.1.3 Sensory transduction involves changes in membrane potentialsIn this chapter we examine several sensory cell types and the sensory organs with which they are associated. In each case we can ask the same general question: How does the sensory cell transduce energy from a stimulus into action potentials? The details differ for different sensory cells, but those details all fit into a general pattern. We have already seen the first step of sensory transduction: the activation of a receptor protein. A receptor protein in the plasma membrane of the sensory cell is activated by a specific stimulus. The activated receptor protein opens or closes ion channels in the membrane by one of several mechanisms. The receptor protein may be part of an ion channel, much like an ionotropic synaptic receptor, and by changing its conformation, it may open or close the channel directly. Alternatively, the activated receptor protein may function like a metabotropic synaptic receptor coupled to a G protein, setting in motion intracellular events that eventually affect ion channels. The opening or closing of ion channels in response to a stimulus changes the membrane potential of the sensory cell, which is called the receptor potential. Such changes in membrane potential can spread by current flow over short distances, but to travel long distances in the nervous system, receptor potentials must be converted into action potentials. The intracellular events involved in the conversion of the original stimulus-induced alteration of ion channels to action potentials can amplify the signal. In other words, the energy in the output of the sensory cell can be greater than the energy in the stimulus.
Receptor potentials produce action potentials in two ways: by generating action potentials within the sensory cell itself, or by releasing a neurotransmitter that induces an associated neuron to generate action potentials. In the first case, the sensory cell has a region of plasma membrane with voltage-gated sodium channels. A receptor potential that spreads to this region is called a generator potential because it generates action potentials by causing the voltage-gated sodium channels to open. A good example of generator potentials is found in the stretch receptors of crayfishes. By placing an electrode in the cell body of a crayfish stretch receptor cell, we can record the changes in the receptor potential that result from stretching the muscle to which the dendrites of the cell are attached. These changes in receptor potential become a generator potential at the base of the sensory cell's axon, where there are voltage-gated sodium channels. Action potentials generated here travel down the axon to the CNS. The rate at which action potentials are fired by the axon depends on the magnitude of the generator potential; that, in turn, depends on how much the muscle is stretched. In sensory cells that do not fire action potentials, the spreading receptor potential reaches a presynaptic patch of plasma membrane and induces the release of a neurotransmitter. Whether or not the sensory cell itself fires action potentials, ultimately the stimulus is transduced into action potentials and the intensity of the stimulus is encoded by the frequency of action potentials.45.1.4 Many receptors adapt to repeated stimulationSome sensory cells give gradually diminishing responses to maintained or repeated stimulation. This phenomenon is known as adaptation, and it enables an animal to ignore background or unchanging conditions while remaining sensitive to changes or to new information. (Note that this use of the term "adaptation" is different from its application in an evolutionary context.) When you dress, you feel each item of clothing touch your skin, but the sensation of clothes touching your skin is not constantly on your mind throughout the day. You are immediately aware, however, when a seam rips, your shoe comes untied, or someone lightly touches your back. The ability of animals to discriminate between continuous and changing stimuli is due partly to the fact that some sensory cells adapt; it is also due to information processing by the CNS. Some sensory cells adapt very little or very slowly; examples are pain receptors and mechanoreceptors for balance. In the rest of this chapter we will learn how sensory systems gather and filter stimuli, transduce specific stimuli into action potentials, and transmit action potentials to the CNS. 45.2 Chemoreceptors: Responding to Specific MoleculesAnimals receive information about chemical stimuli through chemoreceptors. Chemoreceptors are responsible for smell, taste, and the monitoring of aspects of the internal environment such as the level of carbon dioxide in the blood. Chemosensitivity is universal among animals. A colony of corals responds to a small amount of meat extract in the seawater around it by extending bodies and tentacles and searching for food. A solution of a single amino acid can stimulate this response. Humans have similar reactions to chemical stimuli. When we smell freshly baked bread, we salivate and feel hungry, but we gag and retch when we smell diamines from rotting meat. Information from chemoreceptors can cause powerful behavioral and physiological responses.45.2.1 Arthropods provide good examples for studying chemosensationArthropods use chemical signals to attract mates. These signals, called pheromones, demonstrate the sensitivity of chemosensory systems. One of the best-studied examples of this phenomenon is the silkworm moth. To attract a mate, the female silkworm moth releases a pheromone called bombykol from a gland at the tip of her abdomen. The male silkworm moth has receptors for this molecule on his antennae. Each feathery antenna carries about 10,000 bombykol-sensitive hairs. A single molecule of bombykol is sufficient to generate action potentials in the antennal nerve that transmits the signal to the CNS. Because of the male's high degree of sensitivity, the sexual message of a female moth is likely to reach any male that happens to be within a downwind area stretching over several kilometers. When approximately 200 hairs per second are activated, the male flies upwind in search of the female. Because the rate of firing in the male's sensory nerves is proportional to bombykol concentrations in the air, he can follow a concentration gradient and home in on the signaling female. Many arthropods have chemoreceptor hairs, each containing one or more specific types of receptors. Crabs and flies, for example, have chemoreceptor hairs on their feet; they taste potential food by stepping in it. These hairs have receptors for sugars, amino acids, salts, and other molecules. After a fly tastes a drop of sugar water by stepping in it, its proboscis (a tubular feeding structure) extends to feed. Potential food items stimulate extension of the proboscis; other substances do not.45.2.2 Olfaction is the sense of smellThe sense of smell, known as olfaction, also depends on chemoreceptors. In vertebrates, the olfactory sensors are neurons embedded in a layer of epithelial cells at the top of the nasal cavity. The axons of these neurons project to the olfactory bulb of the brain and their dendrites end in olfactory hairs at the surface of the nasal epithelium. A protective layer of mucus covers the epithelium. Molecules from the environment must diffuse through this mucus to reach the receptor proteins on the olfactory hairs. When you have a cold, the amount of mucus increases and the epithelium swells. With this in mind you will easily understand why respiratory infections can cause you lose your sense of smell. A dog has up to 40 million nerve endings per square centimeter of nasal epithelium, many more than we do. Humans have a fairly sensitive olfactory system, but we are unusual among mammals in that we depend more on vision than on olfaction (we tend to join bird-watching societies more often than mammal-smelling societies). Whales and porpoises have no olfactory receptors and hence no sense of smell.How does an olfactory sensory cell transduce the structure of a molecule from the environment into action potentials? A molecule that triggers an olfactory receptor is called an odorant. Odorants bind to receptor proteins on the olfactory hairs of the sensory cells. Olfactory receptor proteins are specific for particular odorant molecules-the two fit together like a lock and key. If a "key" (an odorant molecule) fits the "lock" (the receptor protein), then a G protein is activated, which in turn activates an enzyme that causes an increase of a second messenger in the cytoplasm of the sensory cell. The second messenger binds to sodium channels in the sensory cell's plasma membrane and opens them, causing an influx of Na+. The sensory cell thus depolarizes to threshold and fires action potentials. The olfactory world has an enormous number of "keys"-molecules that produce distinct smells. The number of "locks"-receptor proteins-is large, but not nearly as large as the number of possible odorants. A family of about a thousand genes codes for olfactory receptor proteins. Each receptor protein is expressed in a limited number of sensory cells in the olfactory epithelium, and those cells all project to the same regions in the olfactory bulb. A given odorant molecule may bind to one or to more than one receptor protein. Therefore, each odorant molecule can excite a unique selection of cells in the olfactory bulb, so an olfactory system with a thousand different receptor proteins can discriminate a large number of smells. How does the sensory cell signal the intensity of a smell? It responds in a graded fashion to the concentration of odorant molecules: The more odorant molecules that bind to receptors, the more action potentials are generated and the greater the intensity of the perceived smell.45.2.3 Gustation is the sense of tasteThe sense of taste, or gustation, in humans and other vertebrates depends on clusters of sensory cells called taste buds. The taste buds of terrestrial vertebrates are confined to the mouth cavity, but some fishes have taste buds in the skin that enhance their ability to sense their environment. Some fishes living in murky water are very sensitive to small amounts of amino acids in the water around them and can find food without the use of vision. The duck-billed platypus, a monotreme mammal, has similar talents as a result of taste buds on the sensitive skin of its bill. What is a taste bud and how does it work? A taste bud is a cluster of sensory cells. A human tongue has approximately 10,000 taste buds. The taste buds are embedded in the epithelium of the tongue, and many are found on the raised papillae of the tongue. (Look at your tongue in a mirror-the papillae make it look fuzzy.) Each papilla has many taste buds. The outer surface of a taste bud has a pore that exposes the tips of the sensory cells. Microvilli (tiny hairlike projections) increase the surface area of the sensory cells where their tips converge at the pore. These sensory cells, unlike olfactory receptors, are not neurons. At their bases, they form synapses with dendrites of sensory neurons. Gustation begins with receptor proteins in the membranes of the microvilli. As with olfactory transduction, receptor proteins on the sensory cells bind specific molecules (such as sugar). This binding causes changes in the membrane potential of the sensory cells, which release neurotransmitters onto the dendrites of the sensory neurons. The sensory neurons fire action potentials that are conducted to the CNS.The tongue does a lot of hard work, so its epithelium is shed and replaced at a rapid rate. Individual taste buds last only a few days before they are replaced, but the sensory neurons associated with them live on, always forming new synapses as new taste buds form. You have probably heard that humans can perceive only four tastes: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. In actuality, taste buds can distinguish among a variety of sweet-tasting molecules and a variety of bitter-tasting molecules. The full complexity of the chemosensitivity that enables us to enjoy the subtle flavors of food comes from the combined activation of gustatory and olfactory receptors; that is the reason you lose some of your sense of "taste" when you have a cold. Why does a snake continually sample the air by darting its forked tongue in and out? The forks of the snake's tongue fit into cavities in the roof of its mouth that are richly endowed with olfactory receptors. The tongue samples the air and presents the sample directly to the olfactory receptors. Thus the snake is really using its tongue to smell its environment, not to taste it. Why doesn't the snake simply use the flow of air to and from its lungs, as we do, to smell the environment? In reptiles, air flows to and from the lungs slowly (and can even stop entirely for long periods of time), but the tongue can dart in and out many times in a second. It is a quick source of olfactory information. 45.3 Mechanoreceptors: Detecting Stimuli that Distort MembranesMechanoreceptors are cells that are sensitive to mechanical forces. In the skin, different kinds of mechanoreceptors are responsible for the perception of touch, pressure, and tickle. Stretch receptors in muscles, tendons, and joints provide information about the position of the parts of the body in space and the forces acting on them. Stretch receptors in the walls of blood vessels signal changes in blood pressure. Hair cells with extensions that are sensitive to bending are incorporated into mechanisms for hearing and for signaling the body's position in space. Physical distortion of a mechanoreceptor's plasma membrane causes ion channels to open, altering the membrane potential of the cell, which in turn leads to the generation of action potentials. The rate of action potentials tells the CNS the strength of the stimulus exciting the mechanoreceptor.45.3.1 Many different sensory cells respond to touch and pressureObjects touching the skin generate varied sensations because skin is packed with diverse mechanoreceptors. The outer layers of skin contain whorls of nerve endings enclosed in connective tissue capsules. These very sensitive mechanoreceptors, called Meissner's corpuscles, respond to objects that touch the skin even lightly. Meissner's corpuscles adapt very rapidly. That is why you roll a small object between your fingers, rather than holding it still, to discern its shape and texture. As you roll it, you continue to stimulate these receptors anew. Also in the outer regions of the skin are expanded-tip tactile receptors of various kinds. They differ from Meissner's corpuscles in that they adapt only partly and slowly. They are useful for providing steady-state information about objects that continue to touch the skin. The density of these tactile mechanoreceptors varies across the surface of the body. A two-point discrimination test demonstrates this fact. If you lightly touch someone's back with two toothpicks, you can determine how far apart the two stimuli have to be before the person can distinguish whether he or she was touched with one or two points. On the back, the stimuli have to be rather far apart. The same test applied to the person's lips or fingertips reveals finer spatial discrimination; that is, the person can identify as separate two stimuli that are close together. Deep in the skin, the dendrites of neurons wrap around hair follicles. When the hairs are displaced, those neurons are stimulated. Also deep within the skin is another type of mechanoreceptor, the Pacinian corpuscle. Pacinian corpuscles look like onions because they are made up of concentric layers of connective tissue, which encapsulate an extension of a sensory neuron. Pacinian corpuscles respond especially well to vibrations applied to the skin, but they adapt rapidly to steady pressure. The connective tissue capsule is important in this adaptation. An initial pressure distorts the corpuscle and the plasma membrane of the neuron at its core, but the layers of the capsule rapidly rearrange to redistribute the force, thus eliminating the distortion of the neuronal plasma membrane.45.3.2 Stretch receptors are found in muscles, tendons, and ligamentsAn animal receives information from stretch receptors about the position of its limbs and the stresses on its muscles and joints. These mechanoreceptors are activated by being stretched. They continuously feed information to the CNS, and that information is essential for the coordination of movements. The stretch receptors in skeletal muscle are called muscle spindles. They are embedded in connective tissue within skeletal muscle. They consist of modified muscle fibers that are innervated in the center with extensions of sensory neurons. Whenever the muscle stretches, muscle spindles are also stretched and the neurons transmit action potentials to the CNS 9a). Earlier in this chapter, we saw how crayfish stretch receptors transduce physical force into action potentials. The actions of muscle spindles are similar. Another stretch receptor, the Golgi tendon organ, is found in tendons and ligaments. It provides information about the force generated by a contracting muscle. When a contraction becomes too forceful, the information from the Golgi tendon organ feeds into the spinal cord, inhibits the motor neuron, and causes the contracting muscle to relax, thus protecting the muscle from tearing 9b).45.3.3 Hair cells provide information about balance, orientation in space, and motionHair cells are also mechanoreceptors. Projecting from the surface of each hair cell is a set of stereocilia, which looks like a set of organ pipes. When these stereocilia (which are really microvilli) are bent, they alter receptor proteins in the hair cell's plasma membrane. When the stereocilia of some hair cells are bent in one direction, the receptor potential becomes more negative; when they are bent in the opposite direction, it becomes more positive. When the receptor potential becomes more positive, the hair cell releases neurotransmitter to the sensory neuron associated with it and the sensory neuron sends action potentials to the CNS. Hair cells are found in the lateral line sensory system of fishes. The lateral line consists of a canal just under the surface of the skin that runs down each side of the fish 10). The lateral line provides information about movements of the fish through the water, as well as about moving objects, such as predators or prey, that cause pressure waves in the surrounding water. Many invertebrates have equilibrium organs called statocysts that use hair cells to signal the position of the animal with respect to gravity. A statocyst is a chamber lined with hair cells that contains a dense object called a statolith. As the animal changes its position, the statolith moves in response to gravity, stimulating the hair cells below it. Replacing the statoliths of a lobster with iron filings and holding a magnet over the animal causes it to swim upside down. When a magnet is held to the lobster's side, it swims on its side. Vertebrates also have equilibrium organs. The mammalian inner ear has two equilibrium organs that use hair cells to detect the position of the body with respect to gravity: semicircular canals and the vestibular apparatus. The inner ear contains three semicircular canals at right angles to one another. The vestibular apparatus has two chambers that perform a function similar to that of the statocysts of invertebrates.45.3.4 Auditory systems use hair cells to sense sound wavesThe stimuli that animals perceive as sounds are pressure waves. Auditory systems use mechanoreceptors to transduce pressure waves into action potentials. Auditory systems include special structures to gather sound waves, direct them to the sensory organ, and amplify their effect on the mechanoreceptors. Human hearing provides a good example of an auditory system. The organs of hearing are the ears. The two prominent structures on the sides of our heads usually thought of as ears are the ear pinnae. The pinna of an ear collects sound waves and directs them into the auditory canal, which leads to the actual hearing apparatus in the middle ear and the inner ear. If you have ever watched a rabbit, a horse, or a dog change the orientation of its ear pinnae to focus on a particular sound, then you have witnessed the role of ear pinnae in hearing. The eardrum, or tympanic membrane, covers the end of the auditory canal. The tympanic membrane vibrates in response to pressure waves traveling down the auditory canal. The middle ear, an air-filled cavity, lies on the other side of the tympanic membrane. The middle ear is open to the throat at the back of the mouth through the eustachian tube. Because air flows through the eustachian tube, pressure equilibrates between the middle ear and the outside world. When you have a cold or allergy, the tube can become blocked by mucus or by tissue swelling, so you have difficulty "clearing your ears," or equilibrating the pressure in the middle ear with the outside air pressure. As a result, the flexible tympanic membrane bulges in or out, dampening your hearing and sometimes causing earaches.
The middle ear contains three delicate bones called the ear ossicles, individually named the malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes (stirrup). The ossicles transmit the vibrations of the tympanic membrane to another flexible membrane called the oval window. The leverlike action of the ossicles amplifies the vibrations of the tympanic membrane about 20-fold in transmitting them to the oval window membrane. Behind the oval window lies the fluid-filled inner ear. Movements of the oval window result in pressure changes in the inner ear. These pressure waves are transduced into action potentials. The inner ear is a long, tapered, coiled chamber called the cochlea (from Latin and Greek words for "snail" or "shell"). A cross section of this chamber reveals that it is composed of three parallel canals separated by two membranes: Reissner's membrane and the basilar membrane. Sitting on the basilar membrane is the organ of Corti, the apparatus that transduces pressure waves into action potentials in the auditory nerve, which in turn conveys information from the ear to the brain. The organ of Corti contains hair cells whose stereocilia are in contact with an overhanging, rigid shelf called the tectorial membrane. Whenever the basilar membrane flexes, the tectorial membrane bends the hair cell stereocilia. As a consequence, the hair cells depolarize or hyperpolarize, altering the rate of action potentials transmitted to the brain by their associated sensory neurons. What causes the basilar membrane to flex, and how does this mechanism distinguish sounds of different frequencies? The cochlea is shown uncoiled to make it easier to understand its structure and function. To simplify matters, we have left out Reissner's membrane, thus combining the upper and the middle canals into one upper canal. The purpose of Reissner's membrane is to contain a specific aqueous environment for the organ of Corti separate from the aqueous environment in the rest of the cochlea.
The simplified diagram of the cochlea reveals two additional features that are important to its function. First, the upper and lower chambers separated by the basilar membrane are joined at the distal end of the cochlea (the end farthest from the oval window), making one continuous canal that folds back on itself. Second, just as the oval window is a flexible membrane at the beginning of the cochlea, the round window is a flexible membrane at the end of the long cochlear canal. Air is highly compressible, but fluids are not. Therefore, a sound pressure wave can travel through air without much displacement of the air, but a sound pressure wave in fluid causes displacement of the fluid. When the stapes pushes the oval window in, the fluid in the upper canal of the cochlea is displaced. The cochlear fluid displacement travels down the upper canal, around the bend, and back through the lower canal. At the end of the lower canal, the displacement is absorbed by the outward bulging of the round window. If the oval window vibrates in and out rapidly, the waves of fluid displacement do not have enough time to travel all the way to the end of the upper canal and back through the lower canal. Instead, they take a shortcut by crossing the basilar membrane, causing it to flex. The more rapid the vibration, the closer to the oval and round windows the wave of displacement will flex the basilar membrane. Thus different pitches of sound flex the basilar membrane at different locations and activate different sets of hair cells. The ability of the basilar membrane to respond to vibrations of different frequencies is enhanced by its structure. Near the oval and round windows, at the proximal end, the basilar membrane is narrow and stiff, but it gradually becomes wider and more flexible toward the opposite (distal) end. So it is easier for the proximal basilar membrane to resonate with high frequencies and for the distal basilar membrane to resonate with lower frequencies. A complex sound made up of many frequencies distorts the basilar membrane at many places simultaneously and activates a unique subset of hair cells. Action potentials stimulated by the mechanoreceptors at different positions along the organ of Corti travel to the brain stem along the auditory nerve. Deafness, the loss of the sense of hearing, has two general causes. Conduction deafness is caused by the loss of function of the tympanic membrane and the ossicles of the middle ear. Repeated infections of the middle ear can cause scarring of the tympanic membrane and stiffening of the connections between the ossicles. The consequence is less efficient conduction of sound waves from the tympanic membrane to the oval window. With increasing age, the ossicles progressively stiffen, resulting in a gradual loss of the ability to hear high-frequency sounds. Nerve deafness is caused by damage to the inner ear or the auditory pathways. A common cause of nerve deafness is damage to the hair cells of the delicate organ of Corti by exposure to loud sounds such as jet engines, pneumatic drills, or highly amplified rock music. This damage is cumulative and permanent. 45.4 Photoreceptors and Visual Systems: Responding to LightSensitivity to light-photosensitivity-confers on the simplest animals the ability to orient to the sun and sky and gives more complex animals rapid and extremely detailed information about objects in their environment. It is not surprising that both simple and complex animals can sense and respond to light. What is remarkable is that across the entire range of animal species, evolution has conserved the same basis for photosensitivity: the family of pigments called rhodopsins. In this section we will learn how rhodopsin molecules respond when stimulated by light energy and how that response is transduced into neural signals. We will also examine the structures of eyes, the organs that gather and focus light energy onto photoreceptor cells.45.4.1 Rhodopsin is responsible for photosensitivityPhotosensitivity depends on the ability of rhodopsins to absorb photons of light and to undergo a change in conformation. A rhodopsin molecule consists of a protein, opsin (which by itself does not absorb light), and a light-absorbing prosthetic group, 11-cis-retinal. The light-absorbing group is cradled in the center of the opsin and the entire rhodopsin molecule sits within the plasma membrane of a photoreceptor cell. When the 11-cis-retinal absorbs a photon of light energy, its shape changes into a different isomer of retinal-all-trans-retinal. This change puts a strain on the bonds between retinal and opsin, changing the conformation of opsin. This change in conformation signals the detection of light. In vertebrate eyes, the retinal and the opsin eventually separate from each other-a process called bleaching, which causes the molecule to lose its photosensitivity. When the retinal spontaneously returns to its 11-cis isomer and recombines with opsin, it once again becomes photosensitive rhodopsin. How does the light-induced conformational change of rhodopsin transduce light into a cellular response? After retinal converts from the 11-cis to the all-trans form, its interactions with opsin pass through several unstable intermediate stages. One of these stages is known as photoexcited rhodopsin because it triggers a cascade of reactions that results in the alteration of membrane potential that is the photoreceptor cell's response to light.To get a better idea of how rhodopsin alters the membrane potential of a photoreceptor cell and how that photoreceptor cell signals that it has been stimulated by light, let's look at a vertebrate photoreceptor cell, the rod cell, Like other vertebrate photoreceptor cells, the rod cell is a modified neuron. At the back of the vertebrate eye is the retina, which consists of several layers of neurons. One of these layers contains the photoreceptor cells. The other layers of the retina transduce the visual world into action potentials. Each rod cell in the retina has an outer segment, an inner segment, and a synaptic terminal. The inner segment contains the usual organelles of a cell. The synaptic terminal is where the rod cell communicates with other neurons. The outer segment is highly specialized and contains a stack of discs of plasma membrane densely packed with rhodopsin. The function of the discs is to capture photons of light passing through the rod cell. To see how a rod cell responds to light, we can penetrate a single rod cell with an electrode and record its receptor potential in the dark and in the light 17a). From what we have learned about other types of sensory cells, we might expect stimulation of the rod cell by light to make its receptor potential less negative. But photoreceptor cells are atypical, and the opposite is true. When a rod cell is kept in the dark, it already has a relatively depolarized resting potential in comparison with other neurons. In fact, the plasma membrane of the rod cell is almost as permeable to Na+ ions as to K+ ions, and Na+ ions are continually entering the outer segment of the cell.When a light is flashed on the dark-adapted rod cell, its receptor potential becomes more negative-it hyperpolarizes (Fig 45.18b). The rod cell itself does not generate action potentials. However, the rod cell changes its rate of neurotransmitter release as its membrane potential changes (since the rod cell hyperpolarizes, neurotransmitter release decreases). Later in this section we will learn how other cells in the retina respond to neurotransmitter released from the photoreceptor cells. How does the absorption of light by rhodopsin hyperpolarize the rod cell? When rhodopsin is excited by light, it initiates a cascade of events. The photoexcited rhodopsin combines with and activates another protein, a G protein called transducin. Activated transducin in turn activates a phosphodiesterase, which converts cyclic GMP (cGMP) to 5?-GMP. This reaction plays a central role in phototransduction. In the dark, the cGMP in the outer segment binds to sodium channels, keeping them open and allowing Na+ ions to enter the outer segment. As cGMP is converted to 5?-GMP, the sodium channels close, and the cell hyperpolarizes. This may seem like a roundabout way of doing business, but its advantage is its enormous amplification ability. Each molecule of photoexcited rhodopsin can activate as many as 500 transducin molecules, thus activating a large number of phosphodiesterase molecules. The catalytic capacity of a molecule of phosphodiesterase is great: it can hydrolyze more than 4,000 molecules of cGMP per second. The bottom line is that a single photon of light can cause more than a million sodium channels to close, thereby changing the rod cell's receptor potential. Now let's see how photoreceptors of different types are incorporated into different kinds of visual systems.45.4.2 Invertebrates have a variety of visual systemsFlatworms obtain directional information about light from photoreceptor cells that are organized into eye cups. The eye cups are bilateral structures, each partly shielded from light by a layer of pigmented cells lining the cup. The photoreceptors on the two sides of the animal are unequally stimulated unless the animal is facing directly toward or away from a light source. The flatworm generally uses directional information about light sources to move away from light. Arthropods (crustaceans, spiders, and insects) have evolved compound eyes that provide them with information about patterns or images in the environment. Each compound eye consists of many optical units called ommatidia (singular ommatidium). The number of ommatidia in a compound eye varies from only a few in some ants, to 800 in fruit flies, to 10,000 in some dragonflies. Each ommatidium has a lens structure that directs light onto photoreceptors called retinula cells. Flies, for example, have seven elongated retinula cells in each ommatidium. The inner borders of the retinula cells are covered with microvilli that contain rhodopsin and thus trap light. Since the microvilli of the different retinula cells overlap, they appear to form a central rod, called a rhabdom, down the center of the ommatidium. Axons from the retinula cells communicate with the nervous system. Since each ommatidium of a compound eye is directed at a slightly different part of the visual world, only a crude, or perhaps a broken-up, image can be communicated from the compound eye to the CNS.45.4.3 Image-forming eyes evolved independently in vertebrates and cephalopodsBoth vertebrates and cephalopod mollusks have evolved eyes with exceptional abilities to form images of the visual world. Like cameras, these eyes focus images on a surface sensitive to light. Considering that they evolved independently of each other, their high degree of similarity is remarkable. The vertebrate eye is a spherical, fluid-filled structure bounded by a tough connective tissue layer called the sclera. At the front of the eye, the sclera forms the transparent cornea through which light passes to enter the eye. Just inside the cornea is the pigmented iris, which gives the eye its color. The function of the iris is to control the amount of light that reaches the photoreceptor cells at the back of the eye, just as the diaphragm of a camera controls the amount of light reaching the film. The central opening of the iris is the pupil. The iris is under neural control. In bright light the iris constricts and the pupil is very small. As light levels fall, the iris relaxes and the pupil enlarges.Behind the iris is the crystalline protein lens, which helps focus images on the photosensitive layer, the retina, at the back of the eye. The cornea and the fluids of the eye chambers are mostly responsible for focusing light on the retina, but the lens allows the eye to accommodate-that is, to focus on objects at various locations in the near visual field. To focus a camera on objects close at hand, you adjust the distance between the lens and the film. Fishes, amphibians, and reptiles accommodate in a similar manner, moving the lenses of their eyes closer to or farther from their retinas. Mammals and birds use a different method: they alter the shape of the lens. The lens is contained in a connective tissue sheath that tends to keep it in a spherical shape, but it is attached to suspensory ligaments that pull it into a flatter shape. Circular muscles called the ciliary muscles counteract the pull of the suspensory ligaments and permit the lens to round up. With the ciliary muscles at rest, the flatter lens has the correct optical properties to focus distant images on the retina, but not close images. Contracting the ciliary muscles rounds up the lens, changing its light-bending properties to bring close images into focus. As we age, our lenses become less elastic and we lose the ability to focus on objects close at hand without the help of corrective lenses. As a consequence, most adults over the age of 45 need the assistance of bifocal lenses or reading glasses to compensate for their lost ability to accommodate.45.4.4 The vertebrate retina receives and processes visual informationDuring development, neural tissue grows out from the brain to form the retina. In addition to a layer of photoreceptor cells, the retina includes layers of cells that process the visual information from the photoreceptors and produce an output signal that is transmitted to the brain via the optic nerve. A curious feature of the anatomy of the retina is that the light-absorbing outer segments of the photoreceptor cells are all the way at the back of the retina. Light must pass through all the layers of retinal cells before reaching the place where photons are captured by rhodopsin. We will examine in detail how the cells of the retina process information, but first let's describe some general features of retinal organization.The density of photoreceptor cells is not the same across the entire retina. Light coming from the center of the visual field falls on an area of the retina called the fovea, where the density of photoreceptor cells is the highest. The human fovea has about 160,000 photoreceptors per square millimeter. A hawk has about 1,000,000 photoreceptors per square millimeter of fovea, making its vision sharper than ours. In addition, the hawk has two foveas in each eye: one receives light from straight ahead, while the other receives light from below. Thus while the hawk is flying, it sees both its projected flight path and the ground below, where it might detect a mouse scurrying in the grass. The fovea of a horse is a long, vertical patch of retina. The horse's lens is not good at accommodation, but it focuses distant objects that are straight ahead on one part of this long fovea and close objects that are below the head on another part. When horses are startled by an object close at hand, they pull their heads back and rear up to bring the object into focus on the close-vision part of the fovea.Where blood vessels and the bundle of axons going to the brain (the optic nerve) pass through the back of the eye, there are no photoreceptors, so there is a blind spot on the retina. You are normally not aware of your blind spot, but you can find it. Stare straight ahead, holding a pencil in your outstretched hand so that the eraser is in the center of your field of vision. While continuing to stare straight ahead, slowly move the pencil to the side until the eraser disappears. When this happens, the light from the eraser is focused directly on your blind spot. Until now we have referred to only one kind of photoreceptor cell, the rod cell. But there are two major kinds of vertebrate photoreceptors, both named for their shapes-rod cells and cone cells. A human retina has about 3 million cones and about 100 million rods. Rod cells are more sensitive to light, but do not contribute to color vision. Cone cells are responsible for color vision, but are less sensitive to light. Cones are also responsible for our sharpest vision. Even though there are many more rods than cones in human retinas, our foveas contain only cones.Because cones have low sensitivity to light, they are of no use in dim light. At night our vision is not very sharp and we see mostly in shades of gray. You may have trouble seeing a small object such as a keyhole at night when you are looking straight at it-that is, when its image is falling on your fovea. If you look a little to the side, so that the image falls on a rod-rich area of your retina, you can see the object better. Astronomers looking for faint objects in the sky learned this trick a long time ago. Animals that are nocturnal (such as mice or flying squirrels) may have retinas made up almost entirely of rods and have little or no color vision. By contrast, some animals that are active only during the day (such as chipmunks and ground squirrels) have only cones in their retinas. How do cone cells enable us to see color? The human retina has three kinds of cone cells, each containing slightly different types of opsin molecules. These opsin molecules differ in the wavelengths of light they absorb best. Although the same 11-cis-retinal group is the light absorber, its molecular interactions with opsin tune the spectral sensitivity of the rhodopsin molecule as a whole. Some opsins cause retinal to absorb most efficiently in the blue region, some in the green, and some in the yellow and red. Intermediate wavelengths of light excite these different classes of cones in different proportions. The genes that encode the different opsins of humans have been cloned: One codes for blue-sensitive opsin, one for red-sensitive opsin, and several for green-sensitive opsin.The human retina is organized into five layers of neurons that receive visual information and process it before sending it to the brain. As mentioned earlier, the layer of photoreceptors is all the way at the back of the retina. The outer segments of the rods and cones are partly buried in a layer of pigmented epithelium that absorbs photons not captured by rhodopsin and prevents any backscattering of light that might decrease visual sharpness.information flow in the retina. A first step in investigating how the human retina tells the brain what it is seeing is to study how its five layers of neurons are interconnected and how they influence one another. As we know, the photoreceptor cells at the back of the retina hyperpolarize in response to light and do not generate action potentials. The cells at the front of the retina are ganglion cells. They fire action potentials, and their axons form the optic nerves that travel to the brain. The photoreceptors and ganglion cells are connected by bipolar cells. Like rods and cones, bipolar cells do not fire action potentials.Changes in the membrane potential of rods and cones in response to light alter the rate at which the rods and cones release neurotransmitter at their synapses with the bipolar cells. In response to neurotransmitter from the photoreceptors, the membrane potentials of the bipolar cells change, altering the rate at which they release neurotransmitter onto ganglion cells. The ganglion cells generate action potentials, and the rate of neurotransmitter release from the bipolar cells determines the rate at which they do so. Thus the direct flow of information in the retina is from photoreceptor to bipolar cell to ganglion cell. Ganglion cells send the information to the brain. The other two cell layers, the horizontal cells and the amacrine cells, communicate laterally across the retina. Horizontal cells connect neighboring pairs of photoreceptors and bipolar cells. Thus the communication between a photoreceptor and its bipolar cell can be influenced by the amount of light absorbed by neighboring photoreceptors. This lateral flow of information enables the retina to sharpen the perception of contrast between light and dark patterns. Amacrine cells connect neighboring pairs of bipolar cells and ganglion cells. The role of amacrine cells is still poorly understood. Some amacrine cell types are highly sensitive to changing illumination or to motion. Others assist in adjusting the sensitivity of the eyes according to the overall level of light falling on the retina. When background light levels change, amacrine cell connections to the ganglion cells help the ganglion cells remain sensitive to temporal changes in stimulation. Thus even with large changes in background illumination, the eyes are sensitive to smaller, more rapid changes in the pattern of light falling on the retina.Information processing in the retina.Knowing the paths of information flow through the retina still doesn't tell us how that information is processed. What does the eye tell the brain in response to a pattern of light falling on the retina? One aspect of information processing in the retina is convergence of information. There are more than 100 million photoreceptors in each retina, but only about 1 million ganglion cells sending messages to the brain. How is the information from all those photoreceptors integrated by the ganglion cells? This question was addressed in some elegant, classic experiments in which electrodes were used to record the activity of single ganglion cells in living animals while their retinas were stimulated with spots of light. These studies revealed that each ganglion cell has a well-defined receptive field that consists of a specific group of photoreceptor cells. Stimulating these photoreceptors with light activates the ganglion cell. Information from many photoreceptor cells is integrated in this way to produce a single message. The receptive fields of many ganglion cells are circular, but the way a spot of light influences the activity of the ganglion cell depends on where in the receptive field it falls. The receptive field of a ganglion cell can be divided into two concentric areas, called the center and the surround. There are two kinds of receptive fields, on-center and off-center. Stimulating the center of an on-center receptive field excites the ganglion cell, and stimulating the surround inhibits it. Stimulating the center of an off-center receptive field inhibits the ganglion cell, and stimulating the surround excites it. Center effects are always stronger than surround effects.The response of a ganglion cell to stimulation of the center of its receptive field depends on how much of the surround area is also stimulated. A small dot of light directly on the center has the maximal effect. A bar of light hitting the center and pieces of the surround has less of an effect, and a large, uniform patch of light falling equally on center and surround has very little effect. Ganglion cells communicate information about contrasts between light and dark that fall on different regions of their receptive fields. How are receptive fields related to the connections among the neurons of the retina? The photoreceptors in the center of the receptive field of a ganglion cell are connected to that ganglion cell by bipolar cells. The photoreceptors in the surround send information to the center photoreceptors, and thus to the ganglion cell, through the lateral connections of horizontal cells. Thus the receptive field of a ganglion cell consists of a pattern of synapses among photoreceptors, horizontal cells, bipolar cells, and ganglion cells. The receptive fields of neighboring ganglion cells can overlap greatly; a given photoreceptor can be effectively connected to several ganglion cells. Thus the ganglion cells send simple messages to the brain about the pattern of light intensities falling on small, circular patches of retina. In Chapter 47 we will see how the brain reassembles that information into our view of the world.45.5 Sensory Worlds Beyond Our ExperienceHumans make use of only a subset of the information available to us in the environment. Other animals have sensory systems that enable them to use different subsets and different types of information.45.5.1 Some species can see infrared and ultraviolet lightWhen discussing vision, we use the term "visible light," but what we really mean is light visible to humans. Our visible spectrum is a very narrow region of the entire, continuous range of electromagnetic radiation in the environment. We cannot see ultraviolet radiation, for example, but many other animals can. One of the seven photoreceptors in each ommatidium of a fruit fly is sensitive to ultraviolet light. The visual sensitivity of many pollinating insects includes the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. Some flowers have patterns that are invisible to us, but show up if we photograph them with film that is sensitive to ultraviolet light. Those patterns provide information to prospective pollinators, but humans are not equipped to receive that information. At the other end of the spectrum is infrared radiation, which we sense as heat. Other animals extract much more information from infrared radiation-especially that emitted by potential prey. Pit vipers such as rattlesnakes have pit organs, one just in front of each eye, that use highly sensitive heat detectors and a simple pinhole camera arrangement to sense and locate infrared radiation. In total darkness, these snakes can locate a prey animal such as a mouse, orient to it, and strike it with great accuracy.45.5.2 Echolocation is sensing the world through reflected soundSome species emit intense sounds and create images of their environments from the echoes of those sounds. Bats, porpoises, dolphins, and (to a lesser extent) whales are accomplished echolocators. Some species of bats have elaborate modifications of their noses to direct the sounds they emit, as well as impressive ear pinnae to collect the returning echoes. The high-frequency sounds they emit as pulses (about 20 to 80 per second) are above the range of human hearing, but they are extremely loud in contrast to the resulting faint echoes bouncing off small insects. An echolocating bat is similar to a construction worker who is trying to overhear a whispered conversation on a street corner while using a pneumatic drill. To avoid deafening themselves, bats use muscles in their middle ears to dampen their sensitivity while they emit sounds, then relax them quickly enough to hear the echoes. The ability of bats to use echolocation to sense their environment is so good that in a totally dark room strung with fine wires, they can capture tiny flying insects while navigating around the wires.45.5.3 Some fish can sense electric fieldsWe discussed the mechanoreceptors in the lateral lines of fishes. The lateral lines of some species, especially those such as catfish that live in murky waters, also contain electroreceptors. These sensory cells enable the fish to detect weak electric fields, which can help them locate prey. The use of electroreceptors is even more sophisticated in species called electric fishes. These fishes have evolved electric organs in their tails that generate a continuous series of electric pulses, creating a weak electric field around their bodies. Any objects in the environment, such as rocks, plants, or other fish, disrupt the electric fish's electric field, and the electroreceptors of the lateral line detect those disruptions. In some electric fish species, each individual in a group emits its electric pulses at a different frequency. If a new fish is added to the group, they all readjust their frequencies.46 The Mammalian Nervous System: Structure and Higher FunctionsPhineas Gage was an industrious, responsible, considerate young man. He was 25 years old in 1848, working as a railroad construction foreman. He had the respect of his men, and he looked out for them to the extent that he took on himself the most dangerous tasks associated with blasting the rocks in the path of the railroad. Late one afternoon the last hole had been drilled for the day. Gage poured blasting powder into the hole and tamped it with a meter-long, 3 cm wide iron rod. The tamping iron hit the side of the hole, struck a spark, and ignited the powder. The explosion shot the rod out of the hole like a bullet. It struck Phineas below his left eye, penetrated his skull, passed through the part of his brain behind his forehead, and exited out the top of his head. Was this the end of Phineas Gage? Gage regained consciousness within minutes and could speak. He was taken to a hotel, where a physician dressed his wounds, but the doctor could do little else. Infections were a problem, but Gage's senses and memory were intact. In 3 weeks he left his bed, but he did not return to his work at the railroad. The recovered Phineas Gage was quarrelsome, bad-tempered, lazy, and irresponsible. He was impatient and obstinate, and he used profane language, which he had never done before.The body of Phineas Gage survived the accident, but he was an entirely different person. He spent the rest of his days as a drifter, earning money by telling his story, exhibiting his scars and his tamping iron. If you are in Cambridge, Massachusetts, you can pay him a visit. His skull, death mask, and the tamping iron are on display in the Museum of the Medical College of Harvard University. The sad story of Phineas Gage reveals that the essence of individuality and personality resides in the brain. What is this miraculous organ, and what does it do? The human brain weighs about 1.5 kg, is mostly water, and has the consistency of custard. Yet the complexity of this small mass of tissue exceeds that of any other known matter. The work of the brain is to process and store information and to control the physiology and behavior of the body. The brain is constantly receiving, integrating, and interpreting information from all the senses. To respond to that information, it generates commands to the muscles and organs of the body. The unit of function of the brain is the neuron. The human brain consists of about 10 billion neurons, which account for its ability to handle vast amounts of information. In the previous two chapters we learned about the cellular properties of neurons: how they generate and conduct action potentials, how they transduce sensory information, how they communicate with each other at synapses, and how information is integrated at synapses. In this chapter we take on the challenge of understanding the functions of the human nervous system in terms of these cellular mechanisms. 46.1 The Nervous System: Structure, Function, and Information FlowThe human nervous system is more than the brain. The brain and spinal cord together constitute the central nervous system (CNS). Information is brought to and from the CNS by means of an enormous network of nerves that make up the peripheral nervous system 1a). The peripheral nervous system reaches every tissue of the body. It connects to the CNS via spinal nerves and cranial nerves. A nerve is a bundle of axons 1b) that carries information about many things simultaneously. It is important to distinguish between the axon of a single neuron and a nerve. Some axons in a nerve may be carrying information to the CNS while other axons in the same nerve are carrying information from the CNS to the organs of the body.46.1.1 A conceptual diagram of the nervous system traces information flowThe nervous system is an information processing system-a very complex one that handles many tasks simultaneously. It will help to organize our thinking about the nervous system by beginning with a conceptual diagram of information flow. We can then plug anatomical and functional details into this general model.  The afferent portion of the peripheral nervous system carries information to the CNS. We are consciously aware of much of the information that moves through these afferent pathways (for example, vision, hearing, temperature, pain, the position of limbs), but we are not consciously aware of other afferent information that is important for physiological regulation (for example, blood pressure, deep body temperature, blood oxygen supply).The efferent portion of the peripheral nervous system carries information from the CNS to the muscles and glands of the body. Efferent pathways can be divided into a voluntary division, which executes our conscious movements, and an involuntary, or autonomic, division, which controls physiological functions. In addition to neural information, the CNS receives chemical information in the form of hormones circulating in the blood. Neurohormones released by neurons into the extracellular fluids of the brain can send chemical information to other neurons in the brain or can leave the brain and enter the circulation. In Chapter 41 we learned of the important role of neurohormones in the control of the anterior pituitary and saw that other neurohormones are released from the posterior pituitary into the circulation. Now we can begin to translate our conceptual scheme of information flow into an anatomical view of the nervous system. It can be difficult to learn the relationships between the different structures of the adult nervous system, but the task is much easier if we begin with the development of the nervous system from a simple tubular structure in the embryo.46.1.2 The vertebrate CNS develops from the embryonic neural tubeEarly in the development of all vertebrate embryos, a hollow tube of neural tissue forms (see Chapter 43). This neural tube runs the length of the embryo on its dorsal side. At the anterior end of the embryo, the neural tube forms three swellings that become the basic divisions of the brain: the hindbrain, the midbrain, and the forebrain. The rest of the neural tube becomes the spinal cord. The cranial and spinal nerves, which make up the peripheral nervous system, sprout from the neural tube and grow throughout the embryo. Each of the three regions of the embryonic brain develops into several structures in the adult brain. From the hindbrain come the medulla, the pons, and the cerebellum. The medulla is continuous with the spinal cord. The pons is in front of the medulla, and the cerebellum is a dorsal outgrowth of the pons. The medulla and pons contain distinct groups of neurons that are involved in the control of physiological functions such as breathing and circulation or basic motor patterns such as swallowing and vomiting. All neural information traveling between the spinal cord and higher brain areas must pass through the pons and the medulla. The cerebellum is like the conductor of an orchestra; it receives "copies" of the commands going to the muscles from higher brain areas, and it receives information coming up the spinal cord from the joints and muscles. Thus it can compare the motor "score" with the actual behavior of the muscles and refine the motor commands.From the embryonic midbrain come structures that process aspects of visual and auditory information. In addition, all information traveling between higher brain areas and the spinal cord must pass through the midbrain. The embryonic forebrain develops a central region called the diencephalon and a surrounding structure called the telencephalon. The diencephalon is the core of the forebrain and consists of an upper structure called the thalamus and a lower structure called the hypothalamus. The thalamus is the final relay station for sensory information going to the telencephalon, and the hypothalamus is responsible for the regulation of many physiological functions and biological drives (see Chapters 40 and 41). The telencephalon consists of two cerebral hemispheres, left and right (also referred to as the cerebrum). In humans, the telencephalon is by far the largest part of the brain and plays major roles in sensory perception, learning, memory, and conscious behavior. Understanding the relationships among the many structures of the complex adult brain is a little easier if you keep this linear organization of the neural axis in mind: communication between the spinal cord and the telencephalon travels through the medulla, pons, midbrain, and diencephalon. The medulla, pons, and midbrain are referred to collectively as the brain stem. In general, more primitive and autonomic functions are localized farther down this neural axis, while more complex and evolutionarily advanced functions are found higher on the axis. As we go up the vertebrate phylogenetic scale from fish to mammals, the telencephalon increases in size, complexity, and importance. The forebrain dominates the nervous systems of mammals, and damage to this region results in severe impairment of sensory, motor, or cognitive functions, and even coma. In contrast, a shark with its telencephalon removed can swim almost normally. 46.2 Functional Subsystems of the Nervous SystemWhen we talk about the development of the nervous system, we describe it in terms of anatomically distinct structures. However, the nervous system is always engaged in many tasks at the same time-a phenomenon called parallel processing of information. Any one task usually involves many different anatomical structures. Understanding the nervous system is made simpler if we recognize its functional subsystems, such as the spinal cord, reticular system, limbic system, and cerebrum. Any one anatomical structure may play roles in several functional subsystems.46.2.1 The spinal cord receives and processes information from the bodyThe spinal cord conducts information in both directions between the brain and the organs of the body. It also integrates a great deal of the information coming from the peripheral nervous system and responds to that information by issuing motor commands. The conversion of afferent to efferent information in the spinal cord without participation of the brain is called a spinal reflex. The simplest type of spinal reflex involves only two neurons and one synapse and is therefore called a monosynaptic reflex. An example is the knee-jerk reflex, which your physician checks by tapping just below your knee with a small mallet. We can diagram the wiring of a monosynaptic reflex by following the flow of information through the spinal cord. A cross section of the spinal cord reveals a central area of gray matter in the shape of a butterfly, surrounded by an area of white matter. In the nervous system, gray matter is tissue rich in neuronal cell bodies, and white matter contains axons. The gray matter of the spinal cord contains the cell bodies of the spinal neurons; the white matter contains the axons that conduct information up and down the spinal cord. Spinal nerves leave the spinal cord at regular intervals on each side. Each spinal nerve has two roots connecting to the graymatter-one connecting with the dorsal horn, the other with the ventral horn. Each spinal nerve carries both afferent and efferent information. The afferent axons enter the spinal cord through the dorsal roots and the efferent axons leave the spinal cord through the ventral roots.In the case of the knee-jerk reflex, sensory information comes from stretch receptors in the leg muscle that is suddenly stretched when the mallet strikes the tendon that runs over the knee. Each stretch receptor initiates action potentials that are conducted by the axon of a sensory neuron in through the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and all the way to the ventral horn. In the ventral horn, the sensory neuron synapses with motor neurons, causing them to fire action potentials that are then conducted back to the leg extensor muscle, causing it to contract. The function of this simple circuit is to sense an increased load on the limb, and to cause the muscle to increase its strength of contraction to compensate for the added load. Most spinal circuits are more complex than this monsynaptic reflex. We can demonstrate that by building on the circuit we have just traced. Limb movement is controlled by antagonistic sets of muscles-muscles that work against each other. When one member of an antagonistic set of muscles contracts, it bends or flexes the limb; it is therefore called a flexor. The antagonist to this muscle straightens or extends the limb and is called an extensor. For a limb to move, one muscle of the pair must relax while the other contracts. Thus sensory input that activates the motor neuron of one muscle also inhibits its antagonist. This coordination is achieved by an interneuron, which makes an inhibitory synapse onto the motor neuron of the antagonistic muscle. Thus, the reciprocal inhibition of antagonistic muscles involves an interneuron between the sensory cell and the motor neuron and therefore at least two synapses. Information entering the dorsal horn is also transmitted by axons up the spinal cord to the brain. We are aware of the mallet hitting the knee, but the reflex response actually begins before that information registers in our consciousness. A great deal of information processing takes place in the spinal cord without any input from the brain. Spinal circuits can even generate repetitive motor patterns such as those of walking without commands from the brain.46.2.2 The reticular system alerts the forebrainThe reticular system of the brain stem is a highly complex network of neuronal axons and dendrites. Within the reticular system are many discrete groups of neurons. Such an anatomically distinct group of neurons in the CNS is called a nucleus. The reticular system is distributed through the core of the medulla, pons, and midbrain. Afferent information coming up the neural axis passes through the reticular system, where many connections are made to neurons involved in controlling many functions of the body. Information from joints and muscles, for example, is directed to nuclei in the pons and cerebellum that are involved in balance and coordination, whereas information from pain receptors is directed to nuclei in the brain stem that control sensitivity to pain. This information continues up the neural axis to the forebrain, where it results in conscious sensations that can be localized to the specific sites in the body where the information originated. The information routed through the reticular system also influences the level of arousal of the nervous system. Nuclei in the reticular system are involved in the control of sleep and waking. High levels of activity in the reticular system influence these nuclei to maintain the brain in a waking condition; low levels of activity enable sleep. Because of the alerting function of the reticular core of the brain stem, it has been called the reticular activating system.If the brain stem of a person is damaged at midbrain or higher levels, and the alerting action of the reticular system cannot reach the forebrain, the person loses the ability to be in a conscious, waking state and becomes comatose. Damage to the brain stem or the spinal cord below the reticular system does not interfere with the ascending alerting actions of the reticular system and leaves the person with normal patterns of sleep and waking, although it can cause lack of sensation (paresthesia) and loss of motor function (paralysis).46.2.3 The limbic system supports basic functions of the forebrainThe telencephalon of fishes, amphibians, and reptiles consists of only a few structures surrounding the diencephalon. In birds and mammals, these primitive forebrain structures are completely covered by the evolutionarily more recent elaborations of the telencephalon called the neocortex, but they still have important functions. These primitive parts of the forebrain are collectively referred to as the limbic system. The limbic system is responsible for basic physiological drives, instincts, and emotions. Within the limbic system are areas that when stimulated with small electric currents can cause intense sensations of pleasure, pain, or rage. If a rat is given the opportunity to stimulate its own pleasure centers by pressing a switch, it will ignore food, water, and even sex, pushing the switch until it is exhausted. Pleasure and pain centers in the limbic system are believed to play roles in learning and in physiological drives. One part of the limbic system, the hippocampus, is necessary in humans for the transfer of short-term memory to long-term memory. If you are told a new telephone number, you may be able to hold it in short-term memory for a few minutes, but within half an hour it is forgotten unless you make a real effort to remember it. The phenomenon of remembering something for more than a few minutes requires its transfer to long-term memory.46.2.4 Regions of the cerebrum interact to produce consciousness and control behaviorThe cerebral hemispheres are the dominant structures in the mammalian brain. In humans they are so large that they cover all other parts of the brain except the cerebellum. A sheet of gray matter called the cerebral cortex covers each cerebral hemisphere. The cortex is about 4 mm thick and covers a total surface area over both hemispheres of 1square meter. The cerebral cortex is convoluted, or folded, into ridges called gyri and valleys called sulci. These convolutions allow it to fit into the skull, which is of limited size and volume. Under the cerebral cortex is white matter, made up of the axons that connect the cell bodies in the cortex with one another and with other areas of the brain. Different regions of the cerebral cortex have specific functions. Some of those functions are easily defined, such as receiving and processing sensory information, but most of the cortex is involved in higher-order information processing that is less easy to define. These latter areas are given the general name of association cortex.To understand the cerebral cortex, it helps to have an anatomical road map. As viewed from the left side, a left cerebral hemisphere looks like a boxing glove for the right hand with the fingers pointing forward, the thumb pointing out, and the wrist at the rear. The "thumb" area is the temporal lobe, the fingers the frontal lobe, the back of the hand the parietal lobe, and the wrist the occipital lobe. A mirror image of this arrangement characterizes the right cerebral hemisphere. Let's look at each lobe of the cerebrum separately. The upper region of the temporal lobe receives and processes auditory information. The association areas of the temporal lobe are involved in the recognition, identification, and naming of objects. Damage to the temporal lobe results in disorders called agnosias in which the individual is aware of a stimulus but cannot identify it. Some of these deficits can be quite specific.Damage to one area of the temporal loberesults in the inability to recognize faces. Even old acquaintances cannot be identified by facial features, although they may be identified by other attributes such as voice, body features, and characteristic style of walking. Using monkeys, it has been possible to record from neurons in this region that respond selectively to faces in general. These neurons do not respond to other stimuli in the visual field, and their responsiveness decreases if some of the features of the face are missing or appear in inappropriate locations. Damage to other association areas of the temporal lobe causes deficits in understanding spoken language, even though speaking, reading, and writing abilities may be intact.A strip of the frontal lobe cortex just in front of the central sulcus is called the primary motor cortex. The neurons in this region have axons that project to muscles in specific parts of the body. The parts of the body can be mapped onto the primary motor cortex, from the head region on the lower side to the lower part of the body at the top. Areas with fine motor control, such as the face and hands, have the greatest representation. If a neuron in the primary motor cortex is electrically stimulated, the response is the twitch of a muscle, but not a coordinated, complex behavior. The association functions of the frontal lobe are diverse and are best described as having to do with planning. The story of Phineas Gage at the beginning of this chapter demonstrates the effects of damage to these association areas. People with such deficits have drastic alterations of personality because they cannot create an accurate view of themselves in the context of the world around them and cannot plan for future events.The frontal and parietal lobes are separated by a deep valley called the central sulcus. The strip of parietal lobe cortex just behind the central sulcus is the primary somatosensory cortex. This area receives information through the thalamus about touch and pressure sensations. The whole body surface is represented in the primary somatosensory cortex-the head at the bottom and the legs at the top. Areas of the body that have lots of sensory neurons and are capable of making fine distinctions in touch (such as the lips and the fingers) have disproportionately large representation. If a very small area of the primary somatosensory cortex is stimulated electrically, the subject reports feeling specific sensations, such as touch, from a very localized part of the body. A major association function of the parietal lobe is attending to complex stimuli. Damage to the right parietal lobe causes a condition called contralateral neglect syndrome, in which the individual tends to ignore stimuli from the left side of the body or the left visual field. Such individuals have difficulty performing complex tasks such as dressing the left side of the body; an afflicted man may not be able to shave the left side of his face. When asked to copy simple drawings, a person who exhibits this syndrome can do well with the right side of the drawing, but not the left 10). The parietal cortex is not symmetrical with respect to its role in attention. Damage to the left parietal cortex does not cause neglect of the right side of the body. We will see similar asymmetries in cortical function when we discuss language.The occipital lobes receive and process visual information. We'll learn more about the details of that process later in this chapter. The association areas of the occipital cortex are essential for making sense out of the visual world and translating visual experience into language. Some deficits resulting from damage to association areas of the occipital cortex are quite specific. In one case, a woman with limited damage was unable to see motion. Her vision was intact, but she could see a waterfall only as a still image, and a car approaching only as a series of scenes of a stationary objects at different distances.46.2.5 The cerebrum has increased in size and complexityAs mentioned earlier, the size of the telencephalon relative to the rest of the brain increases substantially as we go from fishes to amphibians, to reptiles, to birds and mammals. Even when we consider only mammals, the cerebral cortex increases in size and complexity when we compare animals such as rodents, whose behavioral repertoires are relatively simple, with animals such as primates that have much more complex behavior. The most dramatic increase in the size of the cerebral cortex took place during the last several million years of human evolution. The incredible intellectual capacities of Homo sapiens are associated with enlargement of the cerebral cortex. Humans do not have the largest brains in the animal kingdom; elephants, whales, and porpoises have larger brains in terms of mass. If we compare brain size to body size, however, humans and dolphins top the list. Humans have the largest ratio of brain size to body size, and they have the most highly developed cerebral cortex. Another feature of the cerebral cortex that reflects increasing behavioral and intellectual capabilities is the ratio of association cortex to primary somatosensory and motor cortexes. Humans have the largest relative amount of association cortex. 46.3 Information Processing by Neuronal NetworksIn Chapter 44 we learned how neurons interact to process information. A goal of neurobiology is to understand the complex functions of the nervous system in terms of the properties of neurons and synapses between them. We will use two subsystems as examples to show how the functions of the nervous system can be understood in terms of neuronal networks. The first example, the autonomic nervous system, consists of efferent pathways; the second, the visual system, consists of afferent and integrative pathways. Techniques that have allowed neurobiologists to trace neuronal connections, chemically characterize synapses, and record the activities of single cells and groups of cells have advanced our understanding of how certain subsystems of the nervous system work.46.3.1 The autonomic nervous system controls organs and organ systemsThe autonomic nervous system is divided into two parts: the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. These two divisions work in opposition to each other in their effects on most organs, one causing an increase in activity and the other causing a decrease. The best-known functions of the autonomic nervous system are those of the sympathetic division called the "fight-or-flight" mechanisms, which increase heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output and prepare the body for emergencies (see Chapter 41). In contrast, the parasympathetic division slows the heart and lowers blood pressure. It is tempting to think of the sympathetic division as the one that speeds things up and the parasympathetic division as the one that slows things down, but that is not always a correct distinction. The sympathetic division slows the digestive system and the parasympathetic division accelerates it. The two divisions of the autonomic nervous system are easily distinguished from each other by their anatomy, their neurotransmitters, and their actions. Both divisions of the autonomic nervous system are efferent pathways. Each autonomic efferent pathway begins with a neuron that has its cell body in the brain stem or spinal cord and uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. These cells are called preganglionic neurons because the second neuron in the pathway with which they synapse resides in a ganglion (a collection of neuronal cell bodies that is outside of the CNS). The second neuron is called a postganglionic neuron because its axon extends out from the ganglion. The axons of the postganglionic neurons end on the cells of the target organs.The postganglionic neurons of the sympathetic division use norepinephrine as their neurotransmitter; those of the parasympathetic division use acetylcholine. In organs that receive both sympathetic and parasympathetic input, the target cells respond in opposite ways to norepinephrine and to acetylcholine. A region of the heart called the pacemaker, which generates the heartbeat, is an example. Stimulating the sympathetic nerve to the heart or dripping norepinephrine onto the pacemaker region depolarizes the pacemaker cells, increases their firing rate, and causes the heart to beat faster. Stimulating the parasympathetic nerve to the heart or dripping acetylcholine onto the pacemaker region hyperpolarizes the pacemaker cells, decreases their firing rate, and causes the heart to beat slower. In contrast, in the digestive tract, norepinephrine hyperpolarizes muscle cells, which slows digestion, and acetylcholine depolarizes muscle cells, which accelerates digestion. The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system can also be distinguished by anatomy. The preganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic division come from the brain stem and the last segment of the spinal cord. The preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic division come from the upper regions of the spinal cord below the neck-the thoracic and lumbar regions. The ganglia of the sympathetic division are mostly lined up in two chains, one on either side of the spinal cord. The parasympathetic ganglia are close to-sometimes sitting on-the target organs. The autonomic nervous system is an important link between the CNS and many physiological functions of the body. Its control of diverse organs and tissues is crucial to homeostasis. In spite of its complexity, work by neurobiologists and physiologists over many decades has made it possible to understand its functions in terms of neuronal properties and circuits. In Chapter 49, for example, we will see how information from pressure receptors in the blood vessels is transmitted to the CNS, where it produces autonomic signals that control the rate of the heartbeat.46.3.2 Neurons and circuits in the occipital cortex integrate visual informationIn Chapter 45 we learned that the information conveyed to the brain in the optic nerve consists of action potentials that are stimulated by light falling on small circular areas of the retina called receptive fields. A receptive field contains many photoreceptor cells connected together in a circuit in such a way that the signals they produce are integrated and transmitted to the brain by a single retinal ganglion cell. The axon of each ganglion cell travels to the brain in the optic nerve. How does the brain construct visual images from information about circular patches of light falling on the retina? Information from the retina is transmitted through the optic nerve to a relay station in the thalamus, and then to the brain's visual processing area, in the occipital cortex at the back of the cerebral hemispheres. David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel of Harvard University studied the activity of neurons in this visual cortex. They recorded the activities of single cells in the brains of living animals while they stimulated the animals' retinas with spots and bars of light. They found that cells in the visual cortex, like retinal ganglion cells, have receptive fields-specific areas of the retina that, when stimulated by light, influence the rate at which the cells fire action potentials.Cells in the visual cortex, however, have receptive fields that differ from the simple circular receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells. Cortical cells called simple cells are maximally stimulated by bars of light that have specific orientations. So, simple cells probably receive input from several ganglion cells whose circular receptive fields are lined up in a row. Complex cells in the visual cortex are also maximally stimulated by a bar of light with a particular orientation, but the bar may fall anywhere on a large area of retina described as that cell's receptive field. Complex cells seem to receive input from several simple cells that share a certain stimulus orientation, but have receptive fields in different places on the retina. Some complex cells respond most strongly when the bar of light moves in a particular direction. The concept that emerges from these experiments is that the brain assembles a mental image of the visual world by analyzing edges of patterns of light falling on the retina. This analysis is conducted in a massively parallel fashion. Each retina sends a million axons to the brain, but there are hundreds of millions of neurons in the visual cortex. Each bit of information from a retinal ganglion cell is received by hundreds of cortical cells, each responsive to a different combination of orientation, position, and even movement of contrasting lines in the pattern of light falling on the retina.46.3.3 Cortical cells receive input from both eyesHow do we see objects in three dimensions? The quick answer is that our two eyes see overlapping, yet slightly different, visual fields; that is, we have binocular vision. Turn a typical conical flowerpot upside down and look down at it so that the bottom of the pot is exactly in the center of your overall field of vision. You see the bottom of the pot, and you see equal amounts of the sides and rim of the pot as concentric circles. Now, if you close your left eye, you see more of the right side and right rim of the pot. With your right eye closed, you see more of the left side and left rim of the pot. The discrepancies in the information coming from your two eyes are interpreted by the brain to provide information about the depth and the three-dimensional shape of the flowerpot. If you are blind in one eye, you have great difficulty discriminating distances. Animals whose eyes are on the sides of their heads have nonoverlapping fields of vision and, as a result, poor depth vision, but they can see predators creeping up from behind. The story of how the brain integrates information from two eyes begins with the paths of the optic nerves. If you look at the underside of the brain, the optic nerves from the two eyes appear to join together just under the hypothalamus and then separate again. The place where they join is called the optic chiasm. Axons from the half of each retina closest to your nose cross in the optic chiasm and go to the opposite side of your brain. The axons from the other half of each retina go to the same side of the brain.The result of this division of axons in the optic chiasm is that all visual information from your left visual field (everything left of straight ahead) goes to the right side of your brain. All visual information from your right visual field goes to the left side of your brain. Both eyes transmit information about a specific spot in your right visual field, for example, to the same place in the left visual cortex. How are the two sources of information integrated? Cells in the visual cortex are organized in columns. These columns alternate: left eye, right eye, left eye, right eye, and so on. Cells closest to the border between two columns receive input from both eyes and are therefore called binocular cells. Binocular cells interpret distance by measuring the disparity between where the same stimulus falls on the two retinas. What is disparity? Hold your finger out in front of you and look at it, closing one eye and then the other. Your finger appears to jump back and forth because its image falls on a different position on each retina. Repeat the exercise with an object at a distance. It doesn't appear to jump back and forth as much because there is less disparity in the positions of the image on the two retinas. Certain binocular cells respond optimally to a stimulus falling on both retinas with a particular disparity. Which set of binocular cells is stimulated depends on how far away the stimulus is. When we look at something, we can detect its shape, color, depth, and movement. Where does all this information come together? Is there a single cell that fires only when a red sports car drives by? Probably not. A specific visual experience comes from simultaneous activity in a large collection of cells. In addition, most visual experiences are enhanced by information from the other senses and from memory as well. This realization helps explain why about 75 percent of the cerebral cortex is association cortex. 47 Effectors: Making Animals MoveThe central nervous system is more than a processor and storage medium for information. It also allows animals to respond to that information. Effectors are tissues and organs that carry out these responses, and most responses of animals involve movement. A fascinating array of adaptations enable animals to move. Consider the act of jumping. When you jump, neural signals from the visual cortex of your brain are routed through spinal circuits that tell certain leg muscles to contract, extending your legs, and hence you jump. Highly skilled and trained athletes can actually outleap their own body height. But as "record jumpers" go, many other animals-cats, spiders, kangaroos, and fleas to name just a few-far surpass even the Olympian feats of humans. A flea, for example, can jump more than 200 times its body length. Unlike a human jumper, the flea's jumping mechanism doesn't involve muscles but works like a slingshot. The flea is so small, and its initial acceleration is so great, that no muscle can contract fast enough to cause such a movement. Instead, at the base of its jumping legs is an elastic material that is compressed by muscles while the flea is resting. When a trigger mechanism is released, the elastic material recoils and "fires" the flea up and over to its target (or away from an enemy). Jumping is just one adaptation an animal can use to respond to information received by its sensory receptors. Effectors include the internal organs and organ systems that the animal uses to control its internal environment; these effectors are the subjects of subsequent chapters. In this chapter, we focus on cilia, flagella, muscles, and skeletons-the mechanisms that create mechanical forces and use those forces to change shape and move, and which are the basis for most animal behavior. At the end we will briefly consider a few effectors other than those that create movement. 47.1 Cilia, Flagella, and Cell MovementTwo subcellular structures, microtubules and microfilaments, generate cell movement. Both of these structures consist of long protein molecules that can change length or shape. Microtubules generate the small-scale movements of cilia and flagella. Microfilaments reach their highest level of organization in muscle cells, which generate large-scale movements.47.1.1 Cilia are tiny, hairlike appendages of cellsCertain protists are covered by dense patches of cilia that propel them through their aqueous environment. Each cilium is tiny, about 0.25 ?m in diameter. Multicellular animals use ciliated cells to move liquids and particles over cell surfaces. Many invertebrates use ciliated cells to obtain food and oxygen. Some mollusks, for example, use cilia to circulate a current of water across their gas exchange and feeding surfaces. The airways of many animals are lined with and cleaned by ciliated cells. In humans, the cilia continuously sweep a layer of mucus from deep down in the lungs, up through the windpipe, and into the throat. The mucus carries particles of dirt and dead cells. We can then either swallow or spit out the mucus, and with it the trapped detritus. Ciliated cells lining the female reproductive tract create currents that sweep eggs from the ovaries into the oviducts and all the way down to the uterus. A cilium moves with the same basic motion as a swimmer's arms during the breaststroke 3a). During the power stroke, the cilium projects stiffly outward and moves backward, propelling the cell forward (or the medium backward). During the recovery stroke, the cilium folds as it returns to its original position. The power stroke is fast, the recovery stroke slow. As you know from moving your arms or legs in water, there is less resistance the slower you move. The resistance of the medium to the recovery stroke is thus slight compared with its resistance to the power stroke. Groups of cilia typically beat in coordinated waves. At any particular moment, some cilia of a cell are moving through the power stroke and others are recovering.47.1.2 Flagella are like long ciliaThe flagella of eukaryotes are identical to cilia except that they are longer and occur singly, or in groups of only a few, on any one cell. Flagellated cells maintain a flow of water through the bodies of sponges, bringing in food and oxygen and removing carbon dioxide and wastes. Flagella power the movement of the sperm of most species. Because of their greater length, flagella have a whiplike stroke pattern rather than the "swimming" stroke pattern of cilia 3b).47.1.3 Cilia and flagella are moved by microtubulesThe core of a cilium or a flagellum is called the axoneme. The axoneme contains a ring of nine pairs of microtubules. In the center of the ring may be an additional pair of microtubules, a single microtubule, or no microtubule. As discussed in Chapter 4, microtubules are hollow tubes formed from polymerization of the globular polypeptide tubulin. Other proteins in the axoneme form spokes, side arms, and cross-links. Side arms composed of the protein dynein generate force. Dynein is a enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP and uses the released energy to change its shape, thereby generating mechanical force. When the dynein arms on one microtubule pair contact a neighboring microtubule pair and bind to it, ATP is broken down, and the resulting conformational changes in the dynein molecules cause the arms to point toward the base of the axoneme. This action pushes the microtubule pair ahead in relation to its neighbor. The dynein arms then detach from the neighboring pair and reorient to their starting horizontal position. As the cycle is repeated, adjacent microtubule pairs try to "row" past each other, with the dynein arms acting as "oars." Axonemes severed from cells continue to flex in a normal pattern if exposed to calcium ions (Ca2+) and ATP, demonstrating that the motile mechanism is part of the axoneme itself and not derived from the associated cell.47.1.4 Microtubules are intracellular effectorsMicrotubules, as components of the cytoskeleton, contribute to the shape of eukaryotic cells. Microtubules are important intracellular effectors for changing cell shape, moving organelles, and enabling cells to respond to their environment. Microtubules change the shapes of cells and move cells by polymerizing and depolymerizing the protein tubulin. As we saw in Chapter 9, the spindle that moves chromosomes to the mitotic poles at anaphase is made up of microtubules. Another example of microtubule involvement in cell movement is the growth of the axons of neurons in the developing nervous system. Neurons find and make their appropriate connections by sending out long extensions that search for the correct contact cells. If polymerization of tubulin is chemically inhibited, the neurons do not extend.47.1.5 Microfilaments change cell shape and cause cell movementsMicrofilaments are proteins that change conformation as a means of generating forces. The dominant microfilament in animal cells is the protein actin. Bundles of cross-linked actin strands form important structural components of cells. The microvilli that increase the absorptive surface area of the cells lining the gut are stiffened by actin microfilaments, as are the stereocilia of the sensory hair cells in the mammlian ear. Actin microfilaments can change the shape of a cell simply by polymerizing and depolymerizing. Together with the protein myosin, actin microfilaments generate the contractile forces responsible for many aspects of cell movement and changes in cell shape. The contractile ring that divides an animal cell undergoing mitosis into two daughter cells is composed of actin microfilaments in association with myosin. The mechanisms that many cells employ to engulf materials (endocytosis) also rely on interactions between actin microfilaments and myosin. Nets of actin and myosin beneath the cell membrane change a cell's shape during endocytosis. Certain cells in multicellular animals travel within the body by amoeboid movement, which is generated by the activity of actin microfilaments and myosin. During development, many cells migrate by amoeboid movement. Throughout an animal's life, phagocytic cells circulate in the blood, squeeze through the walls of the blood vessels, and wander through the tissues by amoeboid movement. The mechanisms of amoeboid movement have been studied extensively in the protist for which this type of movement was named-the amoeba, which lives in freshwater streams and ponds.Amoebas move by extending lobe-shaped projections called pseudopods and then seemingly squeezing themselves into those pseudopods. The cytoplasm in the core of the amoeba, called plasmasol, is relatively liquid, but just beneath the plasma membrane the cytoplasm is much thicker, and is called plasmagel. Reversible changes between plasmasol and plasmagel move the cytoplasm. To form a pseudopod, the thick plasmagel in one area of the cell thins, allowing a bulge to form. Just under the cell surface, in the plasmagel, is a network of actin microfilaments that interacts with myosin to squeeze plasmasol into the bulge. As the microfilament network continues to contract, cytoplasm streams in the direction of the pseudopod. Eventually the cytoplasm at the leading edge of the pseudopod converts to plasmagel, and the pseudopod stops forming. Thus the basis for amoeboid motion is the ability of the cytoplasm to cycle through sol and gel states and the ability of the microfilament network under the cell membrane to contract and cause the cytoplasmic streami47.2 Muscle ContractionMost behavioral and many physiological responses depend on muscle cells. Muscle cells are specialized for contraction and have high densities of actin and myosin. Such cells are found throughout the animal kingdom. Wherever whole tissues contract in animals, muscle cells are responsible. In muscle cells, actin and myosin molecules are organized into filaments consisting of two or more molecules. Actin filaments consist of two actin molecules twisting around each other, and myosin filaments are bundles of many myosin molecules. The actin and myosin filaments lie parallel to each other. When contraction is triggered, the actin and myosin filaments slide past each other in a telescoping fashion. There are three types of vertebrate muscle: smooth muscle, cardiac (heart) muscle, and skeletal muscle. Contraction in all three types is triggered by action potentials moving along their membranes. Although they all use the same contractile mechanism, these three muscle types have important differences that adapt them to their particular functions.47.2.1 Smooth muscle causes slow contractions of many internal organsSmooth muscle provides the contractile force for most of our internal organs, which are under the control of the autonomic nervous system. Smooth muscle moves food through the digestive tract, controls the flow of blood through blood vessels, and empties the urinary bladder. Structurally, smooth muscle cells are the simplest muscle cells. They are usually long and spindle-shaped, and each cell has a single nucleus. Because the filaments of actin and myosin in smooth muscle are not as regularly arranged as those in the other muscle types, the contractile machinery is not obvious when the cells are viewed under the light microscope 5, center). If we study smooth muscle tissue from a particular organ, such as the wall of the digestive tract, we find that it has some interesting properties. The cells are arranged in sheets, and individual cells in the sheets are in electrical contact with one another through gap junctions. As a result, an action potential generated in the membrane of one smooth muscle cell can spread to all the cells in the sheet of tissue. Another interesting property of a smooth muscle cell is that the resting potential of its membrane is sensitive to being stretched. If the wall of the digestive tract is stretched in one location (as by receiving a mouthful of food), the membranes of the stretched cells depolarize, reach threshold, and fire action potentials that cause the cells to contract. Thus smooth muscle contracts after being stretched, and the harder it is stretched, the stronger the contraction. Other factors that alter the membrane potential of smooth muscle cells are the neurotransmitters of the autonomic nervous system. In the case of the digestive tract, acetylcholine causes smooth muscle cells to depolarize and thus makes them more likely to fire action potentials and contract. Norepinephrine causes these muscle cells to hyperpolarize and therefore makes them less likely to fire action potentials and contract.47.2.2 Cardiac muscle causes the heart to beatCardiac muscle looks different from smooth muscle or skeletal muscle when viewed under the microscope 5, top). The cells appear striped, or striated, because of the regular arrangement of bundles of actin and myosin filaments within them. Actin and myosin are arranged in a similar way in skeletal muscle, as we'll see below. The unique feature of cardiac muscle cells is that they branch. The branches of adjoining cells are interdigitated into a meshwork that gives cardiac muscle an ability to resist tearing. As a result, the heart walls can withstand high pressures while pumping blood without the danger of developing leaks. Also adding to the strength of cardiac muscle are intercalated discs that provide strong mechanical adhesions between adjacent cells. As is true of smooth muscle, the individual cells in a sheet of cardiac muscle are in electrical contact with one another. Gap junctions present in the intercalated discs present low resistance to ions or electric currents. Therefore, a depolarization initiated at one point in the heart spreads rapidly through the mass of cardiac muscle. An interesting feature of vertebrate cardiac muscle is that certain specialized muscle cells, called pacemaker cells, initiate the rhythmic contractions of the heart. We'll learn about the molecular basis for this pacemaking function in Chapter 49. Because of these specialized pacemaker cells, the heartbeat is myogenic-generated by the heart muscle itself. The autonomic nervous system modifies the rate of the pacemaker cells, but is not essential for their continued rhythmic function. A heart removed from an animal continues to beat with no input from the nervous system. The myogenic nature of the heartbeat is a major factor in making heart transplants possible.47.2.3 Skeletal muscle causes behaviorSkeletal muscle carries out all voluntary movements, such as running or playing a piano, and generates the movements of breathing. Skeletal muscle is also called striated muscle because the highly regular arrangement of its actin and myosin filaments gives it a striped appearance 5, bottom). Skeletal muscle cells, called muscle fibers, are large. Unlike smooth muscle and cardiac muscle cells, each of which has a single nucleus, skeletal muscle fibers have many nuclei because they develop through the fusion of many individual cells. A muscle such as your biceps (which bends your arm) is composed of many muscle fibers bundled together by connective tissue. What is the relation between a muscle fiber and the actin and myosin filaments responsible for its contraction? Each muscle fiber is composed of myofibrils-bundles of contractile filaments made up of actin and myosin. Within each myofibril are thin actin filaments and thick myosin filaments. If we cut across the myofibril at certain locations, we see only thick filaments; if we cut at other locations, we see only thin filaments. But, in most regions of the myofibril, each thick myosin filament is surrounded by six thin actin filaments. A longitudinal view of a myofibril reveals the reason for the striated appearance of skeletal muscle. The band pattern of the myofibril is due to repeating units called sarcomeres, which are the units of contraction. Each sarcomere is made of overlapping filaments of actin and myosin. As the muscle contracts, the sarcomeres shorten, and the appearance of the band pattern changes. The observation that the widths of the bands in the sarcomeres change when a muscle contracts led two British biologists, Hugh Huxley and Andrew Huxley, to propose a molecular mechanism of muscle contraction. Let's look at the band pattern of the myofibril in detail. Each sarcomere is bounded by Z lines, which are structures that anchor the thin actin filaments. Centered in the sarcomere is the A band, which contains all the myosin filaments. The H zone and the I band, which appear light, are regions where actin and myosin filaments do not overlap in the relaxed muscle. The dark stripe within the H zone is called the M band; it contains proteins that help hold the myosin filaments in their regular hexagonal arrangement.When the muscle contracts, the sarcomere shortens. The H zone and the I band become much narrower, and the Z lines move toward the A band as if the actin filaments were sliding into the region occupied by the myosin filaments. This observation led Huxley and Huxley to propose the sliding filament theory of muscle contraction: Actin and myosin filaments slide past each other as the muscle contracts.To understand what makes the filaments slide, we must examine the structure of actin and of myosin. Each myosin molecule consists of two long polypeptide chains coiled together, each ending in a large globular head. A myosin filament is made up of many myosin molecules arranged in parallel, with their heads projecting laterally from one or the other end of the filament. The actin filament consists of a helical arrangement of two chains of monomers like two strands of pearls twisted together. Twisting around the actin chains is another protein, tropomyosin, and attached to it at intervals are molecules of troponin. We'll discuss the roles of these last two proteins in the following section. The myosin heads have sites that can bind to actin and thereby form bridges between the myosin and the actin filaments. The myosin heads also have ATPase activity; that is, they bind and hydrolyze ATP. The energy released when this happens changes the orientation of the myosin head. Together, these details explain the cycle of events that cause the actin and myosin filaments to slide past each other and shorten the sarcomere. A myosin head binds to an actin filament. Upon binding, the head changes its orientation with respect to the myosin filament, thus exerting a force that causes the actin and myosin filaments to slide about 5 to 10 nm relative to each other. Next, the myosin head binds a molecule of ATP, which causes it to release the actin. When the ATP is hydrolyzed, the energy released causes the myosin head to return to its original conformation, in which it can bind again to actin. It is as if the energy from ATP hydrolysis is being used to cock the hammer of a pistol, and contact of the myosin head with an actin binding site pulls the trigger.We have been discussing the cycle of contraction in terms of a single myosin head. Don't forget that each myosin filament has many myosin heads at both ends and is surrounded by six actin filaments; thus the contraction of the sarcomere involves a great many cycles of interaction between actin and myosin molecules. That is why when a single myosin head breaks its contact with actin, the actin filaments do not slip backward. An interesting aspect of this contractile mechanism is that ATP is needed to break the actin-myosin bonds, but not to form them. Thus muscles require ATP to stop contracting. This fact explains why muscles stiffen soon after animals die, a condition known as rigor mortis. Death stops the replenishment of the ATP stores of muscle cells, so the actin-myosin bonds cannot be broken, and the muscles stiffen. Eventually the proteins begin to lose their integrity, and the muscles soften. These events have regular time courses that differ somewhat for different regions of the body; therefore, an examination of the stiffness of the muscles of a corpse sometimes can help a coroner estimate the time of death.47.2.4 Actin-myosin interactions are controlled by Ca2+Muscle contractions are initiated by action potentials from motor neurons arriving at the neuromuscular junction. Motor neurons are generally highly branched and can synapse with up to a hundred muscle fibers each. All the fibers activated by a single motor neuron constitute a motor unit and contract simultaneously in response to the action potentials fired by that motor neuron. To understand the fine control the nervous system has over muscle contraction, we must examine the membrane system of the muscle fiber and some additional protein components of the actin filaments. Like neurons, vertebrate skeletal muscle fibers are excitable cells: When they are depolarized to a threshold that opens their voltage-gated sodium channels, their plasma membranes generate action potentials, just as the membranes of axons do. When an action potential arrives at the neuromuscular junction, neurotransmitter from the motor neuron binds to receptors in the postsynaptic membrane, causing ion channels in the motor end plate to open. Most of the ions that flow through these channels are K+, and therefore the motor end plate is depolarized. The depolarization of the motor end plate spreads to the surrounding plasma membrane of the muscle fiber, which contains voltage-gated ion channels. When threshold is reached, the plasma membrane fires an action potential that is conducted rapidly to all points on the surface of the muscle fiber.The action potential in a muscle fiber also travels deep within the cell. The plasma membrane of the muscle fiber is continuous with a system of tubules that descends into and branches throughout the cytoplasm (also called the sarcoplasm) of the muscle fiber. The action potential that spreads over the plasma membrane of the muscle fiber also spreads through this system of transverse tubules, or T tubules. The T tubules come into very close contact with a network of intracellular membranes called the sarcoplasmic reticulum that extends throughout the sarcoplasm, surrounding every myofibril. Calcium pumps in the sarcoplasmic reticulum cause this membrane-enclosed compartment of the cell to take up Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasm. Therefore, when the muscle fiber is at rest, there is a high concentration of Ca2+ in the sarcoplasmic reticulum and a low concentration of Ca2+ in the sarcoplasm surrounding the myofibrils. When an action potential spreads through the T tubule system, it causes calcium channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum to open, resulting in the diffusion of Ca2+ ions out of the sarcoplasmic reticulum and into the sarcoplasm surrounding the myofibrils. The Ca2+ stimulates the interaction of actin and myosin and the sliding of the filaments. How does this work? An actin filament, as we have seen, is a helical arrangement of two strands of actin monomers. Lying in the grooves between the two actin strands is the two-stranded protein tropomyosin. At regular intervals, the filament also includes another globular protein, troponin. The troponin molecule has three subunits: one binds actin, one binds tropomyosin, and one binds Ca2+.When Ca2+ is sequestered in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, the tropomyosin strands block the sites on the actin filament where myosin heads can bind. When the T tubule system depolarizes, Ca2+ is released into the sarcoplasm, where it binds to the troponin, changing the shape of the troponin molecule. Because the troponin is bound to the tropomyosin, this conformational change of the troponin twists the tropomyosin enough to expose the actin-myosin binding sites. Thus the cycle of making and breaking actin-myosin bonds is initiated, the filaments are pulled past one another, and the muscle fiber contracts. When the T tubule system repolarizes, the calcium pumps remove the Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasm, causing the tropomyosin to return to the position in which it blocks the binding of myosin heads to actin, and the muscle fiber returns to its resting condition.47.2.5 Calmodulin mediates Ca2+ control of contraction in smooth muscleSmooth muscle cells do not have the troponin-tropomysoin mechanism for controlling contraction, but Ca2+ still plays a critical role. The Ca2+ influx into the sarcoplasm of a smooth muscle cell can be stimulated by action potentials, by hormones, or by stretching. The Ca2+ that enters the sarcoplasm combines with a protein called calmodulin. The calmodulin-Ca2+ complex activates an enzyme called myosin kinase, which can phosphorylate myosin heads. When the myosin heads in smooth muscle are phosphorylated, they can undergo cycles of binding and releasing actin, causing muscle contraction. As Ca2+ is removed from the sarcoplasm, it dissociates from calmodulin, and the activity of myosin kinase falls. In addition, another enzyme, myosin phosphatase, dephosphorylates the myosin and helps stop the actin-myosin interactions.47.2.6 Single muscle twitches are summed into graded contractionsIn skeletal muscle, the arrival of an action potential at a neuromuscular junction causes an action potential in a muscle fiber. The spread of the action potential through the T tubule system of the muscle fiber causes a minimum unit of contraction, called a twitch. A twitch can be measured in terms of the tension, or force, it generates 11a). If action potentials in the muscle fiber are adequately separated in time, each twitch is a discrete, all-or-none phenomenon. If action potentials are fired more rapidly, however, new twitches are triggered before the myofibrils have had a chance to return to their resting condition. As a result, the twitches sum, and the tension generated by the fiber increases and becomes more sustained. Thus an individual muscle fiber can show a graded response to increased levels of stimulation by its motor neuron. At high levels of stimulation, the calcium pumps in the sarcoplasmic reticulum can no longer remove Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasm between action potentials, and the contractile machinery generates maximum tension-a condition known as tetanus 11b). (Do not confuse this condition with the disease tetanus, which is caused by a bacterial toxin and is characterized by spastic contractions of skeletal muscles.)How long a muscle fiber can maintain a tetanic contraction depends on its supply of ATP. Eventually the fiber will become fatigued. It may seem paradoxical that the lack of ATP causes fatigue, since the action of ATP is to break actin-myosin bonds. But remember that the energy released from the hydrolysis of ATP "recocks" the myosin heads, allowing them to cycle through another power stroke. When a muscle is contracting against a load, the cycle of making and breaking actin-myosin bonds must continue to prevent the load from stretching the muscle. The situation is like rowing a boat upstream: You cannot maintain your position relative to the stream bank by just holding the oars out against the current; you have to keep rowing. Likewise, actin-myosin bonds have to keep cycling to maintain tension in the muscle. The ability of a whole muscle to generate different levels of tension depends on how many fibers in that muscle are activated. Whether a muscle contraction is strong or weak depends both on how many of the motor neurons that synapse with that muscle are firing and on the rate at which those neurons are firing. These two factors can be thought of as spatial summation and temporal summation, respectively. Both types of summation increase the strength of contraction of the muscle as a whole. Faster twitching of individual fibers causes temporal summation, and an increase in the number of motor units involved in the contraction causes spatial summation. (Remember that a motor unit consists of all the muscle fibers innervated by a single neuron, and that a single muscle consists of many motor units.)Many muscles of the body maintain a low level of tension called tonus even when the body is at rest. For example, the muscles of the neck, trunk, and limbs that maintain our posture against the pull of gravity are always working, even when we are standing or sitting still. Muscle tonus comes from the activity of a small but changing number of motor units in a muscle; at any one time, some of the muscle's fibers are contracting and others are relaxed. Tonus is constantly being readjusted by the nervous system.47.2.7 Muscle fiber types determine endurance and strengthNot all skeletal muscle fibers are alike, and a single muscle may contain more than one type of fiber. The two major types of skeletal muscle fibers are slow-twitch fibers and fast-twitch fibers 12a). Slow-twitch fibers are also called red muscle because they have lots of the oxygen-binding molecule myoglobin, they have lots of mitochondria, and they are well supplied with blood vessels. A single twitch of a slow-twitch fiber produces low tension. The maximum tension a slow-twitch fiber can produce is low and develops slowly, but these fibers are highly resistant to fatigue. Because slow-twitch fibers have substantial reserves of fuel (glycogen and fat), their abundant mitochondria can maintain a steady, prolonged production of ATP if oxygen is available. Muscles with high proportions of slow-twitch fibers are good for long-term aerobic work (that is, work that requires lots of oxygen). Champion long-distance runners, cross-country skiers, swimmers, and bicyclists have leg and arm muscles consisting mostly of slow-twitch fibers 12b). Fast-twitch fibers are also called white muscle because, in comparison to slow-twitch fibers, they have fewer mitochondria, little or no myoglobin, and fewer blood vessels. The white meat of domestic chickens is composed of fast-twitch fibers. Fast-twitch fibers can develop maximum tension more rapidly than slow-twitch fibers can, and that maximum tension is greater, but fast-twitch fibers become fatigued rapidly. The myosin of fast-twitch fibers has high ATPase activity, so they can put the energy of ATP to work very rapidly, but they cannot replenish it quickly enough to sustain contraction for a long time. Fast-twitch fibers are especially good for short-term work that requires maximum strength. Champion weight lifters and sprinters have leg and arm muscles with high proportions of fast-twitch fibers. What determines the proportion of fast- and slow-twitch fibers in your skeletal muscles? The most important factor is your genetic heritage, so there is some truth to the statement that champions are born, not made. To a certain extent, however, you can alter the properties of your muscle fibers through training. With aerobic training, the oxidative capacity of fast-twitch fibers can improve substantially. But a person born with a high proportion of fast-twitch fibers will never become a champion marathon runner, and a person born with a high proportion of slow-twitch fibers will never become a champion sprinter.47.3 Skeletal Systems Provide Support for MusclesMuscles can only contract and relax. Without something rigid to pull against, a muscle would just be a formless mass that twitches and changes shape. Skeletal systems provide rigid supports against which muscles can pull, creating directed movements. In this section, we'll examine the three types of skeletal systems found in animals: hydrostatic skeletons, exoskeletons, and endoskeletons.47.3.1 A hydrostatic skeleton consists of fluid in a muscular cavityThe simplest type of skeleton is the hydrostatic skeleton of cnidarians, annelids, and many other soft-bodied invertebrates. It consists of a volume of incompressible fluid (water) enclosed in a body cavity surrounded by muscle. When muscles oriented in a certain direction contract, the fluid-filled body cavity bulges out in the opposite direction. The sea anemone, a cnidarian, has a hydrostatic skeleton. Its body cavity is filled with seawater. To extend its body and its tentacles, the anemone closes its mouth and constricts muscle fibers that are arranged in circles around its body. Contraction of these circular muscles puts pressure on the water in the body cavity, and that pressure forces the body and tentacles to extend. The anemone retracts its tentacles and body by contracting muscle fibers that are arranged longitudinally in the body wall and along the tentacles. An earthworm uses its hydrostatic skeleton to crawl. The earthworm's body cavity is divided into many separate, fluid-filled segments. The body wall surrounding each segment has two muscle layers: one in which the muscle fibers are arranged in circles around the body cavity, and another in which the muscle fibers run lengthwise 13a). If the circular muscles in a segment contract, the compartment in that segment narrows and elongates. If the lengthwise (longitudinal) muscles of a segment contract, the compartment shortens and bulges outward.Alternating contractions of the earthworm's circular and longitudinal muscles create waves of narrowing and widening, lengthening and shortening, that travel down the body. The bulging, short segments serve as anchors as the narrowing, expanding segments project forward, and longitudinal contractions pull other segments forward. Bristles help the widest parts of the body to hold firm against the substrate 13b). Another type of locomotion made possible by hydrostatic skeletons is the jet propulsion used by squid and octopuses. Muscles surrounding a water-filled cavity in these cephalopods contract, forcefully expelling water from the animal's body. As the water shoots out under pressure, the animal is propelled in the opposite direction.47.3.2 Exoskeletons are rigid outer structuresAn exoskeleton is a hardened outer surface to which muscles can be attached. Contractions of the muscles cause jointed segments of the exoskeleton to move relative to each other. The simplest example of an exoskeleton is the shell of a mollusk. Some marine mollusks, such as clams and snails, have shells composed of protein strengthened by crystals of calcium carbonate (a rock-hard material). These shells can be massive, affording significant protection against predators. The shells of land snails generally lack the hard mineral component and are much lighter. Molluscan shells can grow as the animal grows, and growth rings are usually apparent on the shells. The most complex exoskeletons are found among the arthropods. An exoskeleton, or cuticle, covers all the outer surfaces of the arthropod's body and all its appendages. It is made up of plates secreted by a layer of cells just below the exoskeleton. A continuous, layered, waxy coating covers the entire body. The cuticle contains stiffening materials everywhere except at the joints, where flexibility must be retained. Muscles attached to the inner surfaces of the arthropod exoskeleton move its parts around the joints.The layers of the cuticle include an outer, thin, waxy epicuticle that protects the bodies of terrestrial arthropods from drying out, and a thicker, inner endocuticle that forms most of the structure. The endocuticle is a tough, pliable material found only in arthropods. It consists of a complex of protein and chitin, a nitrogen-containing polysaccharide. In marine crustaceans the endocuticle is further toughened by insoluble calcium salts. The thickness of the cuticle varies, but it can be thick enough to form a protective armor. An exoskeleton protects all the soft tissues of the animal, but is itself subject to damage by abrasion and crushing. The greatest drawback of the arthropod exoskeleton is that it cannot grow. Therefore, if the animal is to become larger, it must molt, shedding its exoskeleton and forming a new, larger one. A molting animal is vulnerable because the new exoskeleton takes time to harden. The animal's body is temporarily unprotected, and without a firm exoskeleton against which its muscles can exert maximum tension, it is unable to move rapidly. Soft-shelled crabs, a gourmet delicacy, are crabs caught when they are molting.47.3.3 Vertebrate endoskeletons provide supports for musclesThe endoskeleton of vertebrates is an internal scaffolding to which muscles attach and against which they can pull. It is composed of rodlike, platelike, and tubelike bones, which are connected to each other at a variety of joints that allow a wide range of movements. Endoskeletons do not provide the protection that exoskeletons do, but their advantage is that they can grow. Because bones are inside the body, the body can enlarge without shedding its skeleton. The human skeleton consists of 206 bones. It can be divided into an axial skeleton, which includes the skull, vertebral column, and ribs, and an appendicular skeleton, which includes the pectoral girdle, the pelvic girdle, and the bones of the arms, legs, hands, and feet. Two kinds of connective tissue cells produce large amounts of extracellular matrix material to create the vertebrate endoskeleton. The matrix material produced by cartilage cells is a rubbery mixture of proteins and polysaccharides. The principal protein in cartilage is collagen. Collagen fibers run in all directions through the gel-like matrix and give it the well-known strength and resiliency of "gristle."Cartilage is found in parts of the endoskeleton where both stiffness and resiliency are required, such as on the surfaces of joints, where bones move against each other. Cartilage is also the supportive tissue in stiff but flexible structures such as the larynx (voice box), the nose, and the ear pinnae. Sharks and rays are called cartilaginous fishes because their skeletons are composed entirely of cartilage. In all other vertebrates, cartilage is the principal component of the embryonic skeleton, but during development most of it is gradually replaced by bone. Bone consists mostly of extracellular matrix material that contains collagen fibers as well as crystals of insoluble calcium phosphate, which give bone its rigidity and hardness. The skeleton serves as a reservoir of calcium for the rest of the body and is in dynamic equilibrium with soluble calcium in the extracellular fluids of the body. This equilibrium is under the control of calcitonin and parathyroid hormone. If too much calcium is taken from the skeleton, the bones are seriously weakened. The living cells of bone-called osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts-are responsible for the dynamic remodeling of bone that is constantly under way. Osteoblasts lay down new matrix material on bone surfaces. These cells gradually become surrounded by matrix and eventually become enclosed within the bone, at which point they cease laying down matrix but continue to exist within small lacunae (cavities) in the bone. In this state they are called osteocytes. In spite of the vast amounts of matrix between them, osteocytes remain in contact with one another through long cellular extensions that run through tiny channels in the bone. Communication between osteocytes is important in controlling the activities of the cells that are laying down new bone or eroding it away.The cells that erode or reabsorb bone are the osteoclasts. They are derived from the same cell lineage that produces the white blood cells. Osteoclasts burrow into bone, forming cavities and tunnels. Osteoblasts follow osteoclasts, depositing new bone. Thus the interplay of osteoblasts and osteoclasts constantly replaces and remodels the bones. How the activities of the bone cells are coordinated is not understood, but stress placed on bones somehow provides them with information. A remarkable finding in studies of astronauts who had spent long periods in zero gravity was that their bones had decalcified. Conversely, certain bones of athletes can thicken during training, becoming considerably thicker than the same bones in nonathletes. Both thickening and thinning of bones are experienced by someone who has a leg in a cast for a long time. The bones of the uninjured leg carry the person's weight and thicken, while the bones of the inactive leg in the cast thin. The jawbones of people who lose their teeth experience less compressional force during chewing and become considerably reduced..47.3.4 Bones develop from connective tissuesBones are divided into two types on the basis of how they develop. Membranous bone forms on a scaffolding of connective tissue membrane. Cartilage bone forms first as a cartilaginous structure and is gradually hardened (ossified) to become bone. The outer bones of the skull are membranous bones; the bones of the limbs are cartilage bones. Cartilage bones can grow throughout the ossification process. The long bones of the legs and arms, for example, ossify first at the centers and later at each end. Growth can continue until these areas of ossification join. The membranous bones forming the skull cap grow until their edges meet. The soft spot on the top of a baby's head is the point at which the skull bones have not yet joined. The structure of bone may be compact (solid and hard) or cancellous (having numerous internal cavities that make it appear spongy, even though it is rigid). The architecture of a specific bone depends on its position and function, but most bones have both compact and cancellous regions. The shafts of the long bones of the limbs, for example, are cylinders of compact bone surrounding central cavities that contain the bone marrow, where the cellular elements of the blood are made. The ends of the long bones are cancellous 18a). Cancellous bone is lightweight because of its numerous cavities, but it is also strong because its internal meshwork constitutes a support system. It can withstand considerable forces of compression. The rigid, tubelike shaft of compact bone can withstand compression and bending forces. Architects and nature alike use hollow tubes as lightweight structural elements. Most of the compact bone in mammals is called Haversian bone because it is composed of structural units called Haversian systems 18b). Each Haversian system is a set of thin, concentric bony cylinders, between which are the osteocytes in their lacunae. Through the center of each Haversian system runs a narrow canal containing blood vessels. Adjacent Haversian systems are separated by boundaries called glue lines. Haversian bone is resistant to fracturing because cracks tend to stop at glue lines.47.3.5 Bones that have a common joint can work as a leverMuscles and bones work together around joints, where two or more bones come together. Since muscles can only contract and relax, they create movement around joints by working in antagonistic pairs: When one contracts, the other relaxes. With respect to a particular joint, such as the knee, we can refer to the muscle that bends or flexes the joint as the flexor and the muscle that straightens or extends the joint as the extensor. The bones that meet at the joint are held together by ligaments, which are flexible bands of connective tissue. Other straps of connective tissue, called tendons, attach the muscles to the bones. Ligaments help direct the forces generated by muscles by holding tendons in place. In many kinds of joints, only the tendon spans the joint, sometimes moving over the surfaces of the bone like a rope over a pulley. The tendon of the quadriceps muscle traveling over the knee joint is what is tapped to elicit the knee-jerk reflex. The human skeleton has a wide variety of joints with different ranges of movement. Bones around joints and the muscles that work with those bones can be thought of as levers. A lever has a power arm and a load arm that work around a fulcrum (pivot). The length ratio of the two arms determines whether a particular lever can exert a lot of force over a short distance or is better at translating force into large or fast movements. Compare the jaw joint and the knee joint, for example. The power arm of the jaw is long relative to the load arm, allowing the jaw to apply great pressures over a small distance, as when you crack a nut with your teeth. The power arm of the lower leg, on the other hand, is short relative to the load arm, so you can run fast, jump high, and deliver swift kicks, but you cannot apply nearly the pressure with a leg that you can with your jaws. 47.4 Other EffectorsMuscles are universal in animals, but other effectors are more specialized and are shared by only a few animal species. Some specialized effectors are used for defense, some for communication, and some for capture of prey or avoidance of predators. In this section we mention only a few specialized effectors to give a sampling of their evolutionary diversity.47.4.1 Nematocysts capture prey and repel predatorsSome animals possess highly specialized organs that are fired like miniature missiles to capture prey and repel predators. Nematocysts are elaborate cellular structures produced only by hydras, jellyfishes, and other cnidarians. They are concentrated in huge numbers on the outer surface of the tentacles. Each nematocyst consists of a slender thread coiled tightly within a capsule, armed with a spinelike trigger projecting to the outside. When potential prey brushes the trigger, the nematocyst fires, turning the thread inside out and exposing little spines along its base. The thread either entangles or penetrates the body of the victim, and a poison may be simultaneously released around the point of contact. Once the prey is subdued, it is pulled into the mouth of the cnidarian and swallowed. A jellyfish called the Portuguese man-of-war has tentacles that can be several meters long. These animals can capture, subdue, and devour full-grown mackerel, and the poison of their nematocysts is so potent that it can kill a human who becomes tangled in the tentacles.47.4.2 Chromatophores enable animals to change colorA change in body color is a response that some animals use to camouflage themselves in a particular environment or to communicate with other animals. Chromatophores are pigment-containing cells in the skin that can change the color and pattern of the animal. Chromatophores are under nervous or hormonal control, or both; in most cases they can effect a change within minutes or even seconds. In squid, sole, and flounder, all of which spend much time on the seafloor, the famous chameleons (a group of African lizards, and a few other animals, chromatophores enable the animal to blend in with the background on which it is resting and thus escape discovery by predators. Chromatophores with different pigments enable animals to assume different hues or to become mottled to match the background more precisely. In other mollusks, fishes, and lizards, a color change sends a signal to potential mates and territorial rivals of the same species. There are three principal types of chromatophore cells. The most common type has fixed cell boundaries, within which pigmented granules may be moved about by microfilaments. When the pigment is concentrated in the center of each chromatophore, the animal is pale; the animal turns darker when the pigment is dispersed throughout the cell. Another type of chromatophore is capable of amoeboid movement. These cells can mold themselves into shapes with a minimal surface area, leaving the tissue relatively pale, or they can flatten out to make the tissue appear darker.The third type of chromatophore changes shape as a result of the action of muscle fibers radiating outward from the cell. When the muscle fibers are relaxed, the chromatophores are small and compact, and the animal is pale. To darken the animal, the muscle fibers contract and spread the chromatophores over more of the body surface. These chromatophores can change so rapidly that they are used in some species for communication during courtship and aggressive interactions. For example, the cuttlefish, a cephalophod, can signal courtship intentions to a potential mate on one side of its body while signaling aggressive threats to a rival on the other side of its body.47.4.3 Glands can be effectorsGlands are effector organs that produce and release chemicals. Some glands produce hormones for internal signaling. Other glands secrete substances into the gut or onto the body surface. Some of these secretions are used defensively or to capture prey. Others are pheromones, chemical signals released into the environment for communication with other individuals.Certain snakes, frogs, salamanders, spiders, mollusks, and fishes have poison glands. Many of the poisons produced by these glands are extremely specific in their modes of action. For example, the poison dendrotoxin, which certain tribes of the Amazonian rainforest use on the tips of their arrows for hunting, comes from the skin of a frog and blocks certain potassium channels. The snake venom bungarotoxin inactivates the neuromuscular acetylcholine receptors. The puffer fish poison tetrodotoxin blocks voltage-gated sodium channels. A poison from a mollusk, conotoxin, blocks calcium channels. Not all defensive secretions are poisonous, however. A well-known example is the odoriferous chemical mercaptan sprayed by skunks.47.4.4 Electric organs can be shockingVarious fishes can generate electricity, as we saw in Chapter 45. These species include the electric eel, the knife fish, the torpedo (a type of ray), and the electric catfish. The electric fields they generate are used for sensing the environment, for communication, and also for stunning potential predators or prey. The electric organs of these animals evolved from muscles, and they produce electric potentials in the same general way as nerves and muscles do. Electric organs consist of very large, disc-shaped cells arranged in long rows like stacks of batteries. When the cells discharge simultaneously, the electric organ can generate far more voltage and current than can nerve or muscle tissue. Electric eels, for example, can produce up to 600 volts with an output of approximately 100 watts-enough to light a row of light bulbs or to temporarily stun a person.Effectors enable animals to respond to information from their internal and external environments. Most effector mechanisms generate mechanical forces and cause movement. Cell movement is generated by two structures, microtubules and microfilaments, both of which consist of long protein molecules that can change their length or shape. The movements of cilia and flagella depend on microtubules.  Microfilaments allow animal cells to change their shape and move. The three types of vertebrate muscle are smooth, cardiac, and skeletal (striated). Smooth muscle provides contractile force for internal organs. Smooth mucle cells are electrically coupled through gap junctions, so action potentials that cause contraction spread rapidly throughout smooth muscle tissue. Autonomic neurotransmitters alter the membrane potential of smooth muscle cells. The walls of the heart consist of sheets of branching cardiac muscle cells. The cells are electrically coupled through gap junctions, so that action potentials spread rapidly throughout sheets of cardiac muscle and cause coordinated contractions. Some cardiac muscle cells are pacemaker cells that generate the heartbeat. Skeletal, or striated, muscle consists of bundles of muscle fibers. Each muscle fiber is a huge cell containing multiple nuclei and numerous myofibrils, which are bundles of actin and myosin filaments. The regular, overlapping arrangement of the actin and myosin filaments into sarcomeres gives skeletal muscle its striated appearance. During contraction, the actin and myosin filaments slide past each other in a telescoping fashion. The molecular mechanism of muscle contraction involves the binding of the globular heads of myosin molecules to actin. Upon binding, the myosin head changes conformation, causing the two filaments to move relative to each other. Release of the myosin heads from actin and their return to their original conformation requires ATP.  The plasma membrane of the muscle fiber is continuous with a system of T tubules that extends deep into the sarcoplasm (muscle cell cytoplasm). When an action potential spreads across the plasma membrane and through the T tubules, it causes Ca2+ ions to be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The Ca2+ ions bind to troponin and change its conformation, pulling the tropomyosin strands away from the myosin binding sites on the actin filament. Cycles of actin-myosin binding and release occur, and the muscle fiber contracts until the Ca2+ is returned to the sarcoplasmic reticulum. In striated muscle, a single action potential causes a minimum unit of contraction called a twitch. Twitches occurring in rapid succession can be summed, thus increasing the strength of contraction. Slow-twitch muscle fibers are adapted for extended, aerobic work; fast-twitch fibers are adapted for generating maximum forces for short periods of time. The ratio of slow-twitch to fast-twitch fibers in the muscles of an individual is genetically determined. Skeletal systems provide rigid supports against which muscles can pull. Hydrostatic skeletons are fluid-filled cavities that can be squeezed by muscles. Exoskeletons are hardened outer surfaces to which internal muscles are attached. Endoskeletons are internal, articulated systems of rigid rodlike, platelike, and tubelike supports consisting of bone and cartilage to which muscles are attached. Bone is continually being remodeled by osteoblasts, which lay down new bone, and osteoclasts, which erode bone. Bones develop from connective tissue membranes or from cartilage through ossification. Cartilage bone can grow until centers of ossification meet. Bone can be solid and hard (compact bone), or it can contain numerous internal spaces (cancellous bone). Tendons connect muscles to bones; ligaments connect bones to each other and also help direct the forces generated by muscles by holding tendons in place. Muscles and bones work together around joints as systems of levers. Effector organs other than muscles include nematocysts, chromatophores, glands, and structures that produce electric pulses. 48 Gas Exchange in AnimalsIn his book about the first ascent of Mt. Everest, Sir John Hunt relates the following observation made at 26,000 feet, on the South Col, the last camp before the summit attempt. At this altitude climbers are almost totally incapacitated if they do not breathe supplemental oxygen from pressurized bottles: And so back up the gradual slopes, the wind behind me. A much greater effort this, stopping every few yards with a slight anxiety lest I should not make the distance. As I approached the tents, I was astonished to see a bird, a chough, strutting about on the stones near me. During this day, too, Charles Evans saw what must have been a migration of small grey birds across the Col. Neither of us had thought to find any signs of life as high as this. Birds in flight can consume oxygen at a rate that a well-trained human athlete cannot sustain for more than a few minutes. Yet birds fly over the summit of Everest, where human climbers must breathe supplemental oxygen just to plod along at a slow pace. How do they do it? Fish breathing water, with an oxygen content less than 5 percent that of air, can swim much faster, farther, and longer than the best human swimmer. How do they do it? The abilities of some animals to maintain high rates of metabolism depend in part on the capacities of their respiratory gas exchange systems.Some animals carry out their respiratory gas exchange with water and others with air. Both water breathers and air breathers have respiratory systems with adaptations that maximize exchanges of oxygen and carbon dioxide with the environment. These adaptations include specialized surface areas where gas exchange takes place, breathing mechanisms that bring fresh air or water to those surfaces, and circulatory mechanisms for transporting respiratory gases to and from the internal sides of the gas exchange surfaces. Since gases cross the gas exchange surfaces by diffusion only, physical factors that limit diffusion determine the maximum capacities of gas exchange systems. In this chapter we first describe the physical factors that influence respiratory gas exchange. Then we examine the respiratory gas exchange systems of a variety of species, including some highly efficient ones such as fish gills and bird lungs, and less efficient ones such as our own. We also look at the adaptations of the blood for transporting respiratory gases. Finally, we see how respiratory gas exchange systems are controlled and regulated. 48.1 Respiratory Gas ExchangeThe respiratory gases are oxygen (O2) and carbon dioxide (CO2). Cells need to obtain O2 from the environment to produce an adequate supply of ATP through the oxidation of nutrient molecules. An end product of the oxidative metabolism of nutrients is CO2, which must be lost to the environment to prevent toxic effects. Diffusion is the only means by which respiratory gases are exchanged between the internal body fluids of an animal and the outside medium-air or water. There are no active transport mechanisms to move respiratory gases across biological membranes. Because diffusion is a physical process, knowing the physical factors that influence rates of diffusion helps us understand the diverse adaptations of gas exchange systems. You might want to review what you learned about diffusion as a physical phenomenon in Chapter 5. Here, we discuss environmental factors that influence diffusion rates, and then describe the adaptations of respiratory systems for facilitating the diffusion of respiratory gases.48.1.1 Air is a better respiratory medium than waterO2 can be obtained more easily from air than from water for several reasons. The oxygen content of air is much higher than the oxygen content of an equal volume of water. The maximum O2 content of a rapidly flowing stream splashing over rocks and tumbling over waterfalls is less than 10 ml of O2 per liter of water. The O2 content of fresh air is about 200 ml of O2 per liter of air. O2 diffuses about 8,000 times more rapidly in air than in water. In a still pond, the O2 content of the water can be zero only a few millimeters below the surface. When an animal breathes, it does work to move water or air over its specialized gas exchange surfaces. More energy is required to move water than to move air because water is 800 times more dense than air and about 50 times more viscous. The slow diffusion of O2 molecules in water is a problem for air-breathing animals as well as for water-breathing animals. Eukaryotic cells carry out cellular respiration in their mitochondria, which are located in the cytoplasm-an aqueous medium. Cells are bathed in extracellular fluid-also an aqueous medium. The slow rate of O2 diffusion in water limits the efficiency of O2 distribution from gas exchange surfaces to the sites of cellular respiration in both air-breathing and water-breathing animals.Diffusion of O2 in water is so slow that even animal cells with low rates of metabolism can be no more than a couple of millimeters away from a good source of environmental O2. Therefore, in animals that lack an internal system for transporting O2, no cell may be more than about 1 or 2 mm from the outside world-a severe size limit. One way some simple invertebrate animals have grown bigger in spite of this limit is to have a flat, leaflike body 1a). Another way is to have a very thin body built around a central cavity through which water circulates 1b). Otherwise, an animal must have specialized structures to provide an increased surface area for diffusion, an internal circulatory system to carry respiratory gases to and from these structures, and a way in which the surfaces of these gas exchange structures can be continuously bathed with fresh air or water 1c).48.1.2 High temperatures create respiratory problems for aquatic animalsAnimals that breathe water are in a double bind when environmental temperatures rise. Most water breathers are ectothermic-their body temperatures are closely tied to the temperature of the water around them. As the temperature of the water rises, so does their body temperature and metabolic rate (see Chapter 40 for a discussion of Q10 relationships). Thus, with rising temperatures, water breathers need more O2. But warm water holds less dissolved oxygen gas than cold water does (just think of what happens when you open a warm bottle of soda). So, under conditions that increase the need these animals have for O2, there is less O2 in their respiratory medium. In addition, if the animal performs work to move water across its gas exchange surfaces (as fish do, for example), the energy the animal must expend to breathe increases as water temperature rises. Therefore, as water temperature goes up, the water breather must extract more and more O2 from its environment, and a lower percentage of that O2 is available to support activities other than breathing.48.1.3 O2 availability decreases with altitudeJust as a rise in temperature reduces the supply of O2 available to aquatic animals, an increase in altitude reduces the O2 supply for air breathers, because the amount of O2 in the atmosphere decreases with altitude. One way of expressing the amounts of gases in air and in water is by their partial pressures. At sea level, the pressure exerted by the atmosphere is equivalent to the pressure produced by a column of mercury 760 mm high. Therefore, barometric pressure (atmospheric pressure) at sea level is 760 mm of mercury (Hg). Because dry air is 20.9 percent O2, the partial pressure of oxygen (<<PO2) at sea level is 20.9 percent of 760 mm Hg, or about 159 mm Hg. At higher elevations, where there is less air above, barometric pressure declines. At an altitude of 5,300 m, barometric pressure is only half as much as it is at sea level, so the O2 at that altitude is only 80 mm Hg. At the summit of Mount Everest (8,848 m), the O2 is only about 50 mm Hg, roughly one-third what it is at sea level. Since the movement of O2 across respiratory gas exchange surfaces and into the body depends on diffusion, its rate of movement depends on the O2 difference between the air and the body fluids. Therefore, the drastically reduced O2 in the air at a high altitude constrains O2 uptake. Because of these constraints, mountain climbers who venture to the heights of Mount Everest usually breathe O2 from pressurized bottles.48.1.4 Carbon dioxide is lost by diffusionRespiratory gas exchange is a two-way process. CO2 diffuses out of the body as O2 diffuses in. Given the same partial pressure gradient, CO2 and O2 molecules diffuse at about the same rate, whether in air or in water. However, the partial pressure gradients for the diffusion of O2 and CO2 across gas exchange surfaces are not the same. The amount of CO2 in the atmosphere is extremely low (0.03 percent), so there is always a good partial pressure gradient for loss of CO2 from air-breathing animals. Water-breathing animals are much more likely than air breathers to experience high partial pressures of CO2 in their environments. If water is well aerated, well mixed, and does not contain a lot of dead organic material, the diffusion of CO2 from an aquatic animal is not a problem. Stagnant waters that are home to much biological activity or rotting vegetation, however, can have high levels of CO2 and not be able to support animal life. In both air breathers and water breathers, the need to transport CO2 from where it is produced in the cells of the body to where it diffuses into the environment can be a limiting factor in gas exchange (and hence in metabolism).48.1.5 Fick's law applies to all systems of gas exchangeAll adaptations that maximize respiratory gas exchange influence one or more components of a simple equation called Fick's law of diffusion, Q = DA C1 - C2 / L where Q is the rate at which a substance such as O2 diffuses between two locations D is the diffusion coefficient, which is a characteristic of the diffusing substance, the medium, and the temperature (for example, perfume has a higher D than motor oil, and substances diffuse faster in air than in water). A is the cross-sectional area over which the substance is diffusing, C1 and C2 are the concentrations of the substance at two locations, L is the distance between those locations. Therefore, (C1 - C2)/L is a concentration gradient. In discussing respiratory gas exchange, we will use partial pressures rather than concentrations; this term will therefore become a partial pressure gradient. Animals can maximize D for respiratory gases by using air rather than water as their gas exchange medium whenever possible. All other adaptations for maximizing respiratory gas exchange must influence the surface area for exchange or the partial pressure gradient across that surface area. 48.2 Respiratory Adaptations for Gas ExchangeNow that we know the factors that determine the rates of diffusion of respiratory gases, let's take a look at the fascinating array of adaptations that animals have evolved for respiratory gas exchange.48.2.1 Respiratory organs have large surface areas Many anatomical adaptations maximize the specialized body surface area (A) over which respiratory gases can diffuse. External gills are highly branched and folded elaborations of the body surface that provide a large surface area for gas exchange with water 4a). External gills are found in larval amphibians and in many insect species. Because they consist of thin, delicate membranes, they minimize the length of the path (L) traversed by diffusing molecules of O2 and CO2. Because external gills are vulnerable to damage and are tempting morsels for carnivorous organisms, protective body cavities for gills have evolved. Many mollusks, arthropods, and fishes have internal gills in such cavities. Just as the gills of water breathers increase the surface area available for respiratory gas exchange, air-breathing vertebrates have enormous surface areas for gas exchange. Lungs are internal cavities for respiratory gas exchange with air. Their structure is quite different from that of gills. Lungs have a large surface area because they are highly divided, and they are elastic so they can be inflated and deflated with air. Most air-breathing invertebrates are insects, which have a unique respiratory gas exchange system consisting of a highly branched network of air-filled tubes called tracheae that branch through all the tissues of the insect's body. The terminal branches of these tubes are so numerous that they have an enormous surface area.48.2.2 Ventilation and perfusion maximize partial pressure gradientsFick's law of diffusion points to other possible adaptations besides increasing surface area that can increase respiratory gas exchange. Animals maximize the partial pressure gradients (C1 - C2/L) that drive the diffusion of respiratory gases across their gas exchange membranes in several ways: Gill and lung membranes are very thin so that the path length for diffusion (L) is small. Breathing mechanisms ventilate the environmental side of the exchange surfaces so that they are exposed to fresh respiratory medium (air or water) with the highest possible partial pressure of O2 and the lowest possible partial pressure of CO2. Circulatory systems perfuse the internal side of the exchange surfaces with a respiratory gas transport medium that helps maintain the lowest possible partial pressure of O2 and highest possible partial pressure of CO2 on the inside of the exchange membranes.An animal's gas exchange system is made up of its gas exchange surfaces and the mechanisms it uses to ventilate and perfuse those surfaces. The following sections describe four gas exchange systems. First we look at the unique gas exchange system of insects. Then we describe two remarkably efficient systems: fish gills and bird lungs. Finally, we discuss mammalian lungs. Respiratory gases diffuse through air most of the way to and from every cell of an insect's body. This diffusion is achieved through a system of air tubes, or tracheae, that open to the outside environment through holes called spiracles in the sides of the abdomen 5a,b). The tracheae branch into even finer tubes, or tracheoles, until they end in tiny air capillaries 5c). In the insect's flight muscles and other highly active tissues, no mitochondrion is more than a few micrometers away from an air capillary. Because the diffusion rate of oxygen is so much higher in air than in water, air capillaries enable insects to supply oxygen to their cells at high rates. Many insects metabolize at high rates, but their relatively simple gas exchange systems are able to provide them with the oxygen they need. However, the rate of diffusion in insect tracheae and air capillaries is limited by their small diameter (A) and by the length (L) of these dead-end airways, so insects must be relatively small animals.Some species of insects that dive and stay underwater for long periods make use of an interesting variation on diffusion. These insects carry with them a bubble of air. A small bubble may not seem like a very large reservoir of oxygen, yet these insects can stay underwater almost indefinitely with their small airsupplies. The secret has to do with the O2 in the bubble. When the insect dives, the air bubble contains about 80 percent nitrogen and 20 percent O2. As the insect consumes the O2 in its bubble, the bubble shrinks a little. The bubble doesn't disappear, however, because it consists mostly of nitrogen, which the insect doesn't consume. When the O2 in the bubble falls below the O2 in the surrounding water, O2 diffuses from the water into the bubble. For these small animals, the rate of O2 diffusion into the bubble is enough to meet their O2 demand while they are underwater.The internal gills of fishes are supported by usually four gill arches on either side of the fish and lie between the mouth cavity and the protective opercular flaps 6a). Water flows unidirectionally into the fish's mouth, over the gills, and out from under the opercular flaps, so that the gills are continuously bathed with fresh water. This constant flow of water moving over the gills maximizes the O2 on the external surfaces. On the internal side, the circulation of blood minimizes the O2 by sweeping the O2 away as rapidly as it diffuses across. The gills have an enormous surface area for gas exchange because they are so highly divided. Each gill consists of hundreds of leaf-shaped gill filaments 6b). The upper and lower flat surfaces of each gill filament have rows of evenly spaced folds, or lamellae. The lamellae are the gas exchange surfaces. Their delicate structure minimizes the path length for diffusion of gases between blood and water. The surfaces of the lamellae consist of highly flattened epithelial cells, so the water and the red blood cells are separated by little more than 1 or 2 ?m. The flow of blood perfusing the inner surfaces of the lamellae, like the flow of water over the gills, is unidirectional. Afferent blood vessels bring blood to the gills, while efferent blood vessels take blood away from the gills 6c). Blood flows through the lamellae in the direction opposite to the flow of water over the lamellae. This countercurrent flow maximizes the O2 gradient between water and blood, making gas exchange more efficient than it would be in a system using concurrent (parallel) flow. Some fish, including anchovies, tuna, and certain species of sharks, ventilate their gills by swimming almost constantly with their mouths open. Most fish, however, ventilate the external surfaces of their gills by means of a two-pump mechanism that maintains a unidirectional and constant flow of water over the gills. The closing and contracting of the mouth cavity pushes water over the gills, and the opening and closing of the opercular flaps pulls water over the gills. In summary, fish can extract an adequate supply of O2 from meager environmental sources by maximizing the surface area for diffusion, minimizing the path length for diffusion, and maximizing oxygen extraction efficiency by means of constant, unidirectional, countercurrent flow of blood and water over the opposite sides of their gas exchange surfaces.Birds can sustain extremely high levels of activity for much longer than mammals can-even at very high altitudes where mammals cannot even survive. Yet the lungs of a bird are smaller than the lungs of a similar-sized mammal. How can this be? Bird lungs have a unique structure that allows air to flow unidirectionally through the lungs, rather than having to flow in and out through the same airways, as it does in mammalian lungs. In addition to lungs, birds have air sacs at several locations in their bodies. The air sacs are interconnected with the lungs and with air spaces (another unique feature of birds) in some of the bones. The air sacs receive inhaled air, but they are not gas exchange surfaces. The composition of air in an air sac does not change rapidly, as it would if O2 were diffusing into the blood and CO2 were diffusing into the air sac. As in other air-breathing vertebrates, air enters and leaves a bird's gas exchange system through a trachea (commonly known as the windpipe), which divides into smaller airways called bronchi (singular bronchus). In air-breathing vertebrates other than birds, the bronchi generate trees of branching airways that become finer and finer until they dead-end in clusters of microscopic, membrane-enclosed air sacs, where gases are exchanged. In bird lungs, however, there are no dead ends; air flows unidirectionally through the lungs. In bird lungs, the bronchi divide into tubelike parabronchi. Running between the parabronchi are tiny airways called air capillaries. Air flows through the lungs in the parabronchi, but crosses between parabronchi through the air capillaries. The air capillaries are the gas exchange surfaces. They are tiny but numerous, so they provide an enormous surface area for gas exchange.Another unusual feature of bird lungs that once puzzled observers is that they expand and contract less during a breathing cycle than mammalian lungs do. To make things even more puzzling, bird lungs contract during inhalation and expand during exhalation! The puzzle of how birds breathe was solved by an experiment that placed small oxygen sensors at different locations in the air sacs and airways of birds. The bird could then be exposed to pure oxygen for just a single breath, and the progress of that single breath through the bird's gas exchange system could be followed by the oxygen sensors. This experiment showed that a single breath remains in the bird's gas exchange system for two cycles of inhalation and exhalation, and that the air sacs work as bellows maintaining a continuous and unidirectional flow of fresh air through the lungs 10). The advantages of the bird gas exchange system are similar to those of fish gills. Because the air sacs keep fresh air from the outside flowing unidirectionally and practically continuously over the gas exchange surfaces, the O2 on the environmental side of those surfaces is maximized. Furthermore, the unidirectional flow of air through the system makes possible a pattern of blood flow to minimize the O2 on the internal side of the exchange surfaces. It is now clear how birds can fly over Mount Everest. A bird is able to supply its gas exchange surfaces with a continuous flow of fresh air that has a O2 close to that of the ambient air. Even when the O2 of the ambient air is only slightly above the O2 of the blood, O2 can diffuse from air to blood. Next we will see why humans find it difficult to sustain even low levels of metabolic activity at such high altitudes.At the beginning of their evolution, lungs were dead-end sacs, and they remain so today in all air-breathing vertebrates except birds. Because lungs are dead-end sacs, ventilation cannot be constant and unidirectional, but must be tidal: Air flows in and out by the same route. A spirometer shows how we use our lung capacity in breathing. When we are at rest, the amount of air that our normal breathing cycle moves per breath is called the tidal volume (about 500 ml for an average human adult). We can breathe much more deeply and inhale more air than our resting tidal volume; the additional volume of air we can take in above normal tidal volume is our inspiratory reserve volume. Conversely, we can forcefully exhale more air than we normally do during a resting exhalation. This additional amount of air that can be forced out of the lungs is the expiratory reserve volume. But even after the most extreme exhalation possible, some air remains in the lungs. The lungs and airways cannot be collapsed completely; they always contain a residual volume. The total lung capacity is the sum of the residual volume, expiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume.Tidal breathing severely limits the partial pressure gradient available to drive the diffusion of O2 from air into the blood. Fresh air is not moving into the lungs during half of the respiratory cycle; therefore, the average O2 of air in the lungs is considerably less than it is in the air outside the lungs. Furthermore, the incoming air mixes with the stale air that was not expelled by the previous exhalation. The lung volume that is not ventilated with fresh air is called dead space. This dead space consists of the residual volume and, depending on the depth of breathing, some or all of the expiratory reserve volume. The scale tells us that a tidal volume of 500 ml of fresh air mixes with up to 2,000 ml of stale air before reaching the gas exchange surfaces in our lungs. When the O2 in the ambient air is 150 mm Hg, the O2 of the air that reaches our gas exchange surfaces is only about 100 mm Hg. By contrast, the O2 in the water that bathes the lamellae of fish gills or in the air that flows through the air capillaries of bird lungs is the same as the O2 in the outside water or air. In addition to reducing the partial pressure gradient, tidal breathing reduces the efficiency of gas exchange in another way: It does not allow countercurrent gas exchange between air and blood. Because air enters and leaves the gas exchange structures by the same route, there is no anatomical way that blood can flow countercurrent, or even crosscurrent, to the air flow. 48.3 Mammalian Lungs and Gas ExchangeTo offset the inefficiencies of tidal breathing, mammalian lungs have some design features that maximize the rate of gas exchange: an enormous surface area, and a very short path length for diffusion. Mammalian lungs serve the respiratory needs of mammals well, considering the ecologies and lifestyles of these animals. Air enters the lungs through the oral cavity or nasal passage, which join together in the pharynx. From the pharynx, the esophagus conducts food to the stomach and a single airway leads to the lungs. At the beginning of this airway is the larynx, or voice box, which houses the vocal cords. The larynx is the "Adam's apple" that you can see or feel on the front of your neck. The major airway, the trachea, is about 2 cm in diameter. The thin walls of the trachea are prevented from collapsing by rings of cartilage that support them as air pressure changes during the breathing cycle. If you run your fingers down the front of your neck just below your larynx, you can feel a couple of these rings of cartilage. The trachea branches into two smaller bronchi, one leading to each lung. The bronchi branch repeatedly to generate a treelike structure of progressively smaller airways extending to all regions of the lungs. As the branching of the bronchial tree continues to produce still smaller airways, the cartilage supports eventually disappear, marking the transition to bronchioles. The branching continues until the bronchioles are smaller than the diameter of a pencil lead, at which point tiny, thin-walled air sacs called alveoli begin to appear. The alveoli are the sites of gas exchange. Because the airways only conduct air to and from the alveoli and do not themselves conduct gas exchange, their volume is physiological dead space. The number of alveoli in human lungs is about 300 million. Even though each alveolus is very small, the combined surface area for diffusion of respiratory gases is about 70 m2-the size of a badminton court. Each alveolus is made of very thin cells. Between and surrounding the alveoli are networks of the smallest of blood vessels, the capillaries, whose walls are also made up of exceedingly thin endothelial cells. Where capillary meets alveolus, very little space separates them, so the length of the diffusion path between air and blood is less than 2 ?m. Even the diameter of a red blood cell is greater-about 7 ?m.48.3.1 Respiratory tract secretions aid breathingMammalian lungs have two other important adaptations that do not directly influence their gas exchange properties: the production of mucus and the production of surfactant. A surfactant is a substance that reduces the surface tension of a liquid. Lung surfactant reduces the surface tension of the film of fluid lining the insides of the alveoli. What is surface tension and how does it affect lung function? Surface tension is a result of cohesion between the molecules of a liquid. Cohesion gives the surface of the liquid the properties of an elastic membrane. Surface tension is what allows some insects to walk on the surface of water. A surfactant interferes with the cohesive forces that create surface tension. Detergent is a surfactant, and when added to water, it makes walking on water difficult for the water strider. The thin, aqueous layer that lines the alveoli has surface tension, which must be overcome to inflate the lungs. Surface tension normally is reduced by surfactant molecules produced by certain cells in the alveoli. If a baby is born more than a month prematurely, however, these cells may not yet be producing surfactant. Such a premature baby has great difficulty breathing because an enormous effort is required to stretch the alveoli against the surface tension. This condition, known as respiratory distress syndrome, may cause the baby to die from exhaustion and suffocation. Common treatments have been to put the baby on a respirator to assist its breathing and to give the baby hormones to speed its lung development. A new approach, however, is to apply surfactant to the lungs via an aerosol. Many cells lining the airways produce a sticky mucus that captures bits of dirt and microorganisms that are inhaled. This mucus must be continually cleared from the airways. Other cells lining the airways have cilia whose beating moves the mucus with its trapped debris up toward the pharynx, where it is swallowed. This phenomenon, called the mucus escalator, can be adversely affected by inhaled pollutants. Smoking one cigarette can immobilize the cilia of the airways for hours. A smoker's cough results from the need to clear the obstructing mucus from the airways when the mucus escalator is out of order.48.3.2 Lungs are ventilated by pressure changes in the thoracic cavityHuman lungs are suspended in the thoracic cavity, which is bounded on the top by the shoulder girdle, on the sides by the rib cage, and on the bottom by a domed sheet of muscle, the diaphragm. The thoracic cavity is lined on the inside by the pleural membranes, which divide it into right and left pleural cavities enclosing each lung. Because the pleural cavities are closed spaces, any effort to increase their volume creates negative pressure-suction-inside them. Negative pressure within the pleural cavities causes the lungs to expand as air flows into them from the outside. This is the mechanism of inhalation. The diaphragm contracts to begin an inhalation. This contraction pulls the diaphragm down, increasing the volume of the thoracic and pleural cavities. As pressure in the pleural cavities becomes more negative, air moves into the lungs. Exhalation begins when the contraction of the diaphragm ceases. The diaphragm relaxes and moves up, and the elastic recoil of the lungs pushes air out through the airways. During tidal breathing, inhalation is an active process and exhalation is a passive process.The diaphragm is not the only muscle that changes the volume of the pleural cavities. Between the ribs are two sets of intercostal muscles. The external intercostal muscles expand the pleural cavities by lifting the ribs up and outward. The internal intercostal muscles decrease the volume of the thoracic cavity by pulling the ribs down and inward. When heavy demands are placed on the gas exchange system, such as during strenuous exercise, the external intercostal muscles increase the volume of air inhaled, making use of the inspiratory reserve volume, and the internal intercostal muscles increase the amount of air exhaled, making use of the expiratory reserve volume. When the diaphragm is at rest between tidal breaths, the pressure in the pleural cavities is still slightly negative. This slight suction keeps the alveoli partly inflated. If the thoracic wall is punctured-by a knife wound, for example-air leaks into the pleural cavity, and the pressure from this air causes the lung to collapse. If the hole in the thoracic wall is not sealed, the breathing movements of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles pull air into the pleural cavity rather than into the lung, and ventilation of the alveoli in that lung ceases. 48.4 Blood Transport of Respiratory GasesThe circulatory system is the subject of the next chapter, but since two of the substances the blood transports are the respiratory gases (O2 and CO2), we must discuss blood here. The circulatory system uses a pump (the heart) and a network of blood vessels to transport blood and the substances it carries around the body. As O2 diffuses across the gas exchange surfaces into the blood vessels, the circulating blood sweeps it away. As we have seen, this internal perfusion of the gas exchange surfaces minimizes the O2 on the internal side and promotes the diffusion of O2 across the surface at the highest possible rate. The blood then delivers this O2 to the cells and tissues of the body. The liquid part of the blood, the blood plasma, carries some O2 in solution, but its ability to transport O2 is quite limited. Blood plasma can carry only about 0.3 ml of oxygen per 100 ml, which is inadequate to support the metabolism of a person at rest. Fortunately, the blood also contains red blood cells, which are red because they are loaded with the oxygen-binding pigment hemoglobin. Hemoglobin increases the capacity of blood to transport oxygen by about 60-fold. There is quite a diversity of O2-binding pigments among the animals; there is even considerable diversity of hemoglobin molecules. The discussion that follows focuses on human hemoglobin.
48.4.1 Hemoglobin combines reversibly with oxygenRed blood cells contain enormous numbers of hemoglobin molecules. Hemoglobin is a protein consisting of four polypeptide subunits. Each of these polypeptides surrounds a heme group-an iron-containing ring structure that can reversibly bind a molecule of O2. As O2 diffuses into the red blood cells, it binds to hemoglobin. Once O2 is bound, it cannot diffuse back across the red cell plasma membrane. By mopping up O2 molecules as they enter the red blood cells, hemoglobin maximizes the partial pressure gradient driving the diffusion of O2 into the cells. In addition, it enables the red blood cells to carry a large amount of O2 to the tissues of the body. The ability of hemoglobin to pick up or release O2 depends on the partial pressure of O2 in its environment. When the O2 of the blood plasma is high, as it usually is in the lung capillaries, each molecule of hemoglobin can carry its maximum load of four molecules of O2. As the blood circulates through the rest of the body, it encounters lower O2 values. At these lower O2 values, the hemoglobin releases some of the O2 it is carrying. The relation between O2 and the amount of O2 bound to hemoglobin is not linear, but S-shaped (sigmoid). The sigmoid hemoglobin-O2 binding curve reflects interactions between the four subunits of the hemoglobin molecule, each of which can bind one molecule of O2. At low O2 values, only one subunit will bind an O2 molecule.When it does so, the shape of this subunit changes, causing an alteration in the quaternary structure of the whole hemoglobin molecule. This structural change makes it easier for the other subunits to bind a molecule of O2; that is, their O2 affinity is increased. Therefore a smaller increase in O2 is necessary to get most of the hemoglobin molecules to bind two O2 molecules (that is, to become 50 percent saturated) than it was to get them to bind one molecule of O2 (25 percent saturated). The influence of the binding of O2 by one subunit on the O2 affinity of the other subunits is called positive cooperativity, because binding of the first molecule makes binding of the second easier, and so forth.Once the third molecule of O2 is bound, however, the relationship seems to change, as a larger increase in O2 is required to reach 100 percent saturation. This upper bend of the sigmoid curve is due to a probability phenomenon: The closer we get to having all subunits occupied, the less likely it is that a single O2 molecule will find a place to bind. Therefore it takes a relatively greater O2 to achieve 100 percent saturation. This is a good place to mention the danger posed by carbon monoxide (CO), which can come from a faulty furnace or from combusting a fuel such as charcoal or kerosene without adequate ventilation. CO binds to hemoglobin with a higher affinity than does O2. Thus, CO destroys the ability of hemoglobin to transport and release O2 to the tissues of the body. The victim loses consciousness and can die because the brain lacks O2. The O2-binding properties of hemoglobin help get O2 to the tissues that need it most. In the lungs, where the O2 is about 100 mm Hg, the hemoglobin is 100 percent saturated. The O2 in blood returning to the heart from the body is usually about 40 mm Hg. At this O2 the hemoglobin is still about 75 percent saturated. This means that as the blood circulates around the body, only about 1 of 4 O2 molecules it carries is released to the tissues. That seems inefficient, but it is really quite adaptive, because the hemoglobin keeps 75 percent of its oxygen in reserve to meet peak demands. When a tissue becomes starved of oxygen and its local O2 falls below 40 mm Hg, the hemoglobin flowing through that tissue is on the steep portion of its sigmoid binding curve. That means that relatively small decreases in O2 below 40 mm Hg will result in the release of lots of O2 to the tissue. Thus the cooperativity of O2 binding by hemoglobin is very effective in making O2 available to the tissues precisely when and where it is needed most.48.4.2 Myoglobin holds an oxygen reserveMuscle cells have their own oxygen-binding molecule, myoglobin. Myoglobin consists of just one polypeptide chain associated with an iron-containing ring structure that can bind one molecule of oxygen. Myoglobin has a higher affinity for O2 than hemoglobin does, so it picks up and holds oxygen at O2 values at which hemoglobin is releasing its bound O2. Myoglobin provides a reserve of oxygen for the muscle cells for times when metabolic demands are high and blood flow is interrupted. Interruption of blood flow in muscles is common because contracting muscles constrict blood vessels. When tissue O2 values are low and hemoglobin can no longer supply more O2, myoglobin releases its bound O2. Diving mammals such as seals have high concentrations of myoglobin in their muscles, which is one reason they can stay underwater for so long. (We will learn more about adaptations for diving in the next chapter.) Even in nondiving animals, muscles called on for extended periods of work frequently have more myoglobin than muscles that are used for short, intermittent periods. This is one of the reasons for the difference in appearance between fast-twitch and slow-twitch muscle.48.4.3 The affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen is variableVarious factors influence the oxygen-binding properties of hemoglobin, thereby influencing oxygen delivery to tissues. In this section we examine three of these factors: the chemical composition of the hemoglobin, pH, and the presence of 2,3 diphosphoglyceric acid. As we noted above, there is more than one type of hemoglobin. The chemical composition of the polypeptide chains that form the hemoglobin molecule varies. The normal hemoglobin of adult humans has two each of two kinds of polypeptide chains-two alpha chains and two beta chains-and the oxygen-binding characteristics. Before birth, the human fetus has a different form of hemoglobin, consisting of two alpha chains and two gamma chains. The functional difference between these two types of hemoglobin is that the fetal hemoglobin has a higher affinity for O2. Therefore, the hemoglobin-O2 binding curve of fetal hemoglobin is shifted to the left in comparison to the curve for adult hemoglobin. You can see from these curves that if both types of hemoglobin are at the same O2, the fetal hemoglobin will pick up oxygen released by the adult hemoglobin. This difference in O2 affinities facilitates the transfer of O2 from the mother's blood to the blood of the fetus in the placenta. Llamas and vicuas are mammals native to high altitudes in the Andes Mountains of South America. In the natural habitat of these animals, more than 5,000 m above sea level, the O2 is below 85 mm Hg, and the O2 in their lungs is about 50 mm Hg. Thus, the hemoglobins of these animals must be able to pick up O2 in an environment that has a low <PO2. The hemoglobins of llamas and vicuas have oxygen-binding curves to the left of the curves of hemoglobins of most other mammals-in other words, their hemoglobin can become saturated with O2 at lower O2 values than those of other animals can.The oxygen-binding properties of hemoglobin are influenced by physiological conditions. The influence of pH on the function of hemoglobin is known as the Bohr effect. As the blood plasma picks up acidic metabolites such as lactic acid, fatty acids, and CO2 (which combines with water to form carbonic acid) from the tissues, its pH falls. When this happens, the oxygen-binding curve of hemoglobin shifts to the right. This shift means that the hemoglobin will release more O2 to the tissues-another way that O2 is supplied where and when it is most needed. Diphosphoglyceric acid (DPG) is a metabolite in the glycolytic pathway. Mammalian red blood cells have a high concentration of DPG, an important regulator of hemoglobin function. DPG reversibly combines with deoxygenated hemoglobin and changes the shape of the hemoglobin such that it has a lower affinity for O2. The result is that at any <PO2, hemoglobin releases more of its bound O2 than it otherwise would. In other words, DPG shifts the oxygen-binding curve of mammalian hemoglobin to the right. When humans go to high altitudes, or when they cease being sedentary and begin to exercise, the level of DPG in their red blood cells goes up and makes it easier for the hemoglobin to deliver more O2 to the tissues. The reason that fetal hemoglobin has a left-shifted hemoglobin-O2 binding curve is that it has a lower affinity for DPG than does adult hemoglobin. Llamas and humans employ opposite adjustments of hemoglobin function as adaptations for life at high altitudes. The llama's hemoglobin has a left-shifted oxygen-binding curve, which means that it can become 100 percent saturated with O2 at the low O2 values at high altitudes. As a consequence, the llama's tissues must operate at a lower <PO2. By contrast, human hemoglobin acquires, through acclimation, a right-shifted oxygen-binding curve. The result is that human hemoglobin never becomes fully saturated with O2 at high altitudes, but more of the O2 carried by that hemoglobin is released to the tissues.48.4.4 Carbon dioxide is transported as bicarbonate ions in the bloodDelivering O2 to the tissues is only half of the respiratory function of the blood. The blood also must take carbon dioxide, a metabolic waste product, away from the tissues. CO2 is highly soluble and readily diffuses through cell membranes, moving from its site of production in a cell into the blood, where the partial pressure of CO2 is lower. However, very little dissolved CO2 is transported by the blood. Most CO2 produced by the tissues is transported to the lungs in the form of the bicarbonate ion, HCO3-. How and where CO2 is converted to HCO3-, is transported, and then is converted back to CO2 is an interesting story. When CO2 dissolves in water, some of it slowly reacts with the water molecules to form carbonic acid (H2CO3), some of which then dissociates into a proton (H+) and a bicarbonate ion (HCO3-). This reversible reaction is expressed as follows: CO2 + H2O  H2CO3  H+ + HCO3. In the blood plasma, the reaction between CO2 and H2O proceeds slowly. But it is a different story in the endothelial cells of the capillaries and in the red blood cells, where the enzyme carbonic anhydrase speeds up the conversion of CO2 to H2CO3. The newly formed carbonic acid dissociates and the resulting bicarbonate ions enter the plasma in exchange for Cl-. By converting CO2 to H2CO3, carbonic anhydrase reduces the partial pressure of CO2 in these cells and in the plasma, facilitating the diffusion of CO2 from tissue cells to endothelial cells, plasma, and red blood cells. Most CO2 is transported by the blood plasma as bicarbonate ion produced in endothelial cells and in red blood cells. Some CO2 is also carried in chemical combination with deoxygenated hemoglobin as carboxyhemoglobin. In the lungs, the reactions involving CO2 and bicarbonate ions are reversed. CO2 diffuses from the pulmonary capillaries to the alveolar air and is exhaled. Since the CO2 in the alveoli is less than the CO2 in the plasma and in the endothelial cells, CO2 leaves the plasma and the endothelial cells and enters the alveoli. As the CO2 in the plasma falls, CO2 diffuses from the red blood cells into the plasma and from there into the endothelial cells and into the alveoli. As the CO2 in the red blood cells falls, more HCO3- is converted into CO2, and more HCO3- moves into the red blood cells from the plasma. Remember that an enzyme like carbonic anhydrase only speeds up a reversible reaction; it does not determine its direction. Direction is determined by concentrations of reactants and products.48.5 Regulating Breathing to Supply O2We must breathe every minute of our lives, but we don't worry about our need to breathe, or even think about it very often. Breathing is an autonomic function of the nervous system. The breathing pattern easily adjusts itself around other activities (such as speech and eating), and breathing rates change to match the metabolic demands of our bodies. In this section we examine how the regular breathing cycle is generated and controlled.48.5.1 Breathing is controlled in the brain stemThe autonomic nervous system maintains breathing and modifies its depth and frequency to meet the demands of the body for O2 supply and CO2 elimination. Breathing ceases if the spinal cord is severed in the neck region, showing that the breathing pattern is generated in the brain. If the brain stem is cut just above the medulla, the segment of the brain stem just above the spinal cord, an irregular breathing pattern remains. Groups of neurons within the medulla increase their firing rates just before an inhalation begins. As more and more of these neurons fire-and fire faster and faster-the diaphragm contracts. Suddenly the neurons stop firing, the diaphragm relaxes, and exhalation begins. Exhalation is usually a passive process that depends on the elastic recoil of the lung tissues. When breathing demand is high, however, as during strenuous exercise, motor neurons for the intercostal muscles are recruited, which increases both the inhalation and the exhalation volumes. Brain areas above the medulla modify breathing to accommodate speech, ingestion of food, coughing, and emotional states. An override reflex prevents the breathing muscles from overdistending and damaging the lung tissue. This reflex, which is called the Hering-Breuer reflex, begins with stretch receptors in the lung tissue. When stretched, these receptors send impulses to the medulla that inhibit the inhalation neurons.48.5.2 Regulating breathing requires feedback informationWhen the O2 and the CO2 in the blood change, the breathing rhythm changes to return these values to normal levels. We should therefore expect the blood partial pressure of one or both of these gases to provide feedback information to the breathing rhythm generator. Experiments in which subjects breathe gases with different O2 and CO2 make it possible to measure the effect of these changes on breathing. In these experiments, it is assumed that the O2 or CO2 in inhaled air will be reflected in the blood. The conclusion from such experiments is that humans and other mammals are remarkably insensitive to falling blood levels of O2, but very sensitive to increases in the CO2 of the blood. Where are gas partial pressures in the blood sensed? The major site of CO2 sensitivity is an area on the ventral surface of the medulla, not far from the groups of neurons that generate the breathing rhythm. Sensitivity to O2 in the blood resides in nodes of tissue on the large blood vessels leaving the heart: the aorta and the carotid arteries. These carotid and aortic bodies receive enormous supplies of blood, and they contain chemoreceptor nerve endings. If the blood supply to these structures decreases, or if the O2 of the blood falls dramatically, the chemoreceptors are activated and send impulses to the breathing control center. Although we are not very sensitive to changes in blood O2, the carotid and aortic bodies can stimulate increases in breathing during exposure to very high altitudes or when blood volume or blood pressure is very low.Respiratory Gas Exchange, Most cells require a constant supply of O2 and continuous removal of CO2. These respiratory gases are exchanged between the body fluids of an animal and its environment by diffusion. In aquatic animals, gas exchange is limited by the low diffusion rate and low amount of oxygen in water. Aquatic animals face a double bind in that the amount of oxygen in water decreases, but their metabolism and the amount of work required to move water over gas exchange surfaces increase, as water temperature rises. Respiratory Adaptations for Gas Exchange, The evolution of large animals with high metabolic rates required the evolution of adaptations to maximize the rates of diffusion of respiratory gases between animals and their environments. These adaptations involve increasing surface areas for gas exchange and maximizing partial pressure gradients across those exchange surfaces by decreasing their thickness, ventilating the outer surface with respiratory medium, and perfusing the inner surface with blood. Insects distribute air throughout their bodies in a system of tracheae, tracheoles, and air capillaries. Fish have maximized their rates of gas exchange by having large gas exchange surface areas that are ventilated continuously and unidirectionally with fresh water. Countercurrent blood flow helps increase the efficiency of gas exchange. The gas exchange system of birds includes air sacs that communicate with the lungs but are not used for gas exchange. Air flows unidirectionally through bird lungs in parabronchi. Gases are exchanged in air capillaries that run between parabronchi. Each breath of air remains in the bird respiratory system for two breathing cycles. The air sacs work as bellows to supply the air capillaries with a continuous, unidirectional flow of fresh air. Breathing in vertebrates other than birds is tidal and is therefore less efficient than gas exchange in fishes or birds. Even though the volume of air exchanged with each breath can vary considerably, the inhaled air is always mixed with stale air.Mammalian Lungs and Gas Exchange, In mammalian lungs, the gas exchange surface area provided by the millions of alveoli is enormous, and the diffusion path length between the air and perfusing blood is very short. Surface tension in the alveoli would make their inflation difficult if the lungs did not produce surfactant. Inhalation occurs when contractions of the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles create negative pressure in the thoracic cavity. Relaxation of the diaphragm and some intercostal muscles and contraction of other intercostal muscles increases pressure in the thoracic cavity and causes exhalation. Blood Transport of Respiratory Gases, Oxygen is reversibly bound to hemoglobin in red blood cells. Each molecule of hemoglobin can carry a maximum of four molecules of oxygen. Because of positive cooperativity, the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen depends on the O2 to which the hemoglobin is exposed. Therefore, hemoglobin gives up oxygen in metabolically active tissues and picks up oxygen as it flows through respiratory exchange structures. Myoglobin has a very high affinity for oxygen and serves as an oxygen reserve in muscle. There is more than one type of hemoglobin. Fetal hemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen than does maternal hemoglobin, allowing fetal blood to pick up oxygen from the maternal blood in the placenta. The affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen is decreased by the presence of hydrogen ions or 2.3 diphosphoglyceric acid. Carbon dioxide is carried in the blood principally as bicarbonate ions. Regulating Breathing to Supply O2, The breathing rhythm is an autonomic function generated by neurons in the medulla of the brain stem and modulated by higher brain centers. The most important feedback stimulus for breathing is the level of CO2 in the blood. The breathing rhythm is sensitive to feedback from chemoreceptors on the ventral surface of the brain stem and in the carotid and aortic bodies on the large vessels leaving the heart. 49 Circulatory SystemsYour heart is a little bigger than your fist. This mass of muscle pumps about 70 ml of blood to your lungs and an equal amount to the rest of the organs of your body with each beat, and when you are at rest, it beats about once each second. Even when you are at rest, your heart pumps your total blood volume through your lungs and around your body about once each minute. Circulating blood has many functions, such as delivery of oxygen and nutrients to cells, removal of waste products of metabolism, and distribution of heat and hormones. It is not surprising, therefore, that when you work or exercise, your heart rate and the amount of blood your heart pumps each minute go up as much as three or four times to match the increasing metabolic demands. Because blood flow can be redistributed to different tissues and organs depending on their needs, blood flow to your active muscles might increase more than 25-fold during exercise. It makes sense that working muscles should get a greater blood supply. Consider, however, the cardiovascular responses of a seal searching for and pursuing prey underwater for over half an hour. The seal's response to this underwater exercise is very different from yours. Its heart slows dramatically, from about 150 beats per minute to 20, its cardiac output falls proportionally, and blood flow to the muscles propelling its swimming falls practically to zero. Blood flow to the heart is less than a third what it was before the dive began. Only blood flow to its nervous system is maintained at pre-dive levels. Because the circulatory system of the seal responds differently during exercise than yours does, the seal is able to conserve its oxygen supplies and remain underwater for long periods. By the end of this chapter, you will understand the adaptations of circulatory systems that enable you to match blood supply with demand in your exercising muscles and enable the seal to decrease its utilization of oxygen during long dives.We begin this chapter by contrasting the open and closed circulatory systems of invertebrates. Then we discuss the evolution, structure, and function of vertebrate circulatory systems, going from the two-chambered hearts and single blood circuits of fishes to the four-chambered hearts and double blood circuits of birds and mammals. Taking the human heart as a model, we explore the mechanics of the beating heart and the events of the cardiac cycle that pump blood around the body. After the heart, we turn to the characteristics of the vascular system: the arteries, capillaries, and veins. We explain how materials are exchanged between the blood and the tissue fluids. The third component of a circulatory system is the blood, and we describe the features of this fluid tissue. The chapter ends with a discussion of the hormonal and neural control and regulation of the human circulatory system and an explanation of the diving adaptations of marine mammals such as the seal. 49.1 Circulatory Systems: Pumps, Vessels, and BloodA circulatory system consists of a pump (heart), a fluid (blood) that can transport materials, and a series of conduits (blood vessels) through which the fluid can be pumped around the body. Heart, blood, and vessels are also known as a cardiovascular system (from the Greek kardia, "heart," and the Latin vasculum, "small vessel"). In this section, we compare the circulatory systems of different groups of animals.49.1.1 Some simple aquatic animals do not have circulatory systemsA circulatory system is unnecessary if the cells of an organism are close enough to the external environment that nutrients, respiratory gases, and wastes can diffuse between the cells and the environment. Small aquatic invertebrates have structures and body shapes that permit direct exchanges between cells and environment. The hydra, a cnidarian, is a good example. All cells of the hydra are in contact with, or very close to, the water that either surrounds the animal or circulates through its gastrovascular cavity, a dead-end sac that serves both for digestion ("gastro-") and for transport ("vascular"). The cells of some other invertebrates are served by highly branched gastrovascular systems, and many have flattened body shapes that maximize the surface area of the animal that is in contact with the external environment 1b). Large surface-to-volume ratios and branched gastrovascular systems cannot satisfy the needs of larger animals with many layers of cells. The cells of these animals are surrounded by internal, but extracellular, fluids-commonly called tissue fluids. Circulatory systems carry materials to and from all regions of the body to maintain the optimum composition of the tissue fluids, which in turn serve the needs of the cells. Terrestrial animals require circulatory systems because none of their cells are bathed by an external aqueous medium, and all their cells must be served by tissue fluids.49.1.2 Open circulatory systems move tissue fluidThe simplest circulatory systems squeeze tissue fluid through intercellular spaces as the animal moves. In these open circulatory systems there is no distinction between tissue fluid and blood. Usually a muscular pump, or heart, assists the distribution of the fluid. The contractions of the heart propel the tissue fluid through vessels leading to different regions of the body, but the fluid leaves those vessels to trickle through the tissues and eventually return to the heart. The fluidreturns to the heart through valved holes called ostia. In the mollusk, open vessels aid in the return of tissue fluid to the heart.49.1.3 Closed circulatory systems circulate blood through tissuesIn a closed circulatory system, a system of vessels keeps circulating blood separate from the tissue fluid. Blood is pumped through this vascular system by one or more muscular hearts, and some components of the blood never leave the vessels. A simple example of a closed circulatory system is that of the common earthworm, an annelid. One large blood vessel on the ventral side of the earthworm carries blood from its anterior end to its posterior end. Smaller vessels branch off and transport the blood to even smaller vessels serving the tissues in each segment of the worm's body. In the smallest vessels, respiratory gases, nutrients, and metabolic wastes diffuse between the blood and the tissue fluid. The blood then flows from these vessels into larger vessels that lead into one large vessel on the dorsal side of the worm. The dorsal vessel carries the blood from the posterior to the anterior end of the body. Five pairs of vessels connect the large dorsal and ventral vessels in the anterior end, thus completing the circuit. The dorsal vessel and the five connecting vessels serve as hearts for the earthworm; their contractions keep the blood circulating. The direction of circulation is determined by one-way valves in the dorsal and connecting vessels. Closed circulatory systems have several advantages over open systems. Blood can flow more rapidly through vessels than through intercellular spaces, and thereforecan transport nutrients and wastes to and from tissues more rapidly. By changing resistances in the vessels, closed systems can selectively direct blood to specific tissues. Cellular elements and large molecules that aid in the transport of hormones and nutrients can be kept within the vessels. Overall, closed circulatory systems can support higher levels of metabolic activity than open systems, especially in larger animals. How, then, do highly active insect species achieve high levels of metabolic output with their open circulatory systems? One answer to this question is can be found in Chapter 48: Insects do not depend on their circulatory systems for respiratory gas exchange. 49.2 Vertebrate Circulatory SystemsVertebrates have closed circulatory systems and hearts with two or more chambers. Valves between the chambers, and between the chambers and the vessels, prevent the backflow of blood when the heart contracts. As we explore the features of the circulatory systems of the different classes of vertebrates, a general evolutionary theme will become apparent: there is a progressively more complete separation of the circulation of blood to the gas exchange organ from the circulation of blood to the rest of the body. In fishes, blood is pumped from the heart to the gills and then to the tissues of the body and back to the heart. In birds and mammals, blood is pumped from the heart to the lungs and back to the heart in a pulmonary circuit, and then from the heart to the rest of the body and back to the heart in a systemic circuit. We will trace the evolution of the separation of the circulation into two circuits. The closed vascular system of vertebrates includes arteries that carry blood away from the heart and veins that carry blood back to the heart. Arterioles are small arteries, and venules are small veins. Capillaries are tiny, thin-walled vessels that connect arterioles and venules. Materials are exchanged between the blood and the tissue fluid only across capillary walls.49.2.1 Fishes have two-chambered heartsThe fish heart has two chambers. A less muscular chamber, called the atrium, receives blood from the body and pumps it into a more muscular chamber, the ventricle. The ventricle pumps the blood to the gills, where gases are exchanged. Blood leaving the gills collects in a large dorsal artery, the aorta, which distributes blood to smaller arteries and arterioles leading to all the organs and tissues of the body. In the tissues, blood flows through beds of tiny capillaries, collects in venules and veins, and eventually returns to the heart. Most of the pressure imparted to the blood by the contraction of the ventricle is dissipated by the high resistance of the narrow spaces through which blood flows in the gills. As a result, blood entering the aorta of the fish is under low pressure, limiting the capacity of the fish circulatory system to supply the tissues with oxygen and nutrients. This limitation on arterial blood pressure does not seem to hamper the performance of many rapidly swimming species, such as tuna and marlin. The evolutionary transition from breathing water to breathing air had important consequences for the vertebrate circulatory system. An example of how the system changed to serve a primitive lung is seen the African lungfish. These fish are periodically exposed to water with low oxygen content or to situations in which their aquatic environment dries up. Their adaptation for dealing with these conditions is an outpocketing of the gut that serves as a lung. The lung contains many thin-walled blood vessels, so blood flowing through those vessels can pick up oxygen from air gulped into the lung. How does the circulatory system take advantage of this new organ? The last pair of gill arteries is modified to carry blood to the lung, and a new vessel carries oxygenated blood from the lung back to the heart. In addition, two other gill arches have lost their gills, and their blood vessels deliver blood from the heart directly to the dorsal aorta. Because a few of the gill arches retain gills, the African lungfish can breathe either air or water. The lungfish heart has adaptations that partially separate the flow of its blood into pulmonary and systemic circuits. Unlike other fishes, the lungfish has a partly divided atrium; the left side receives oxygenated blood from the lungs, and the right side receives deoxygenated blood from the other tissues. These two bloodstreams stay mostly separate as they flow through the ventricle and the large vessel leading to the gill arches, so that the oxygenated blood goes to the gill arteries leading to the dorsal aorta, and the deoxygenated blood goes to the arches with functional gills and to the lung.49.2.2 Amphibians have three-chambered heartsPulmonary and systemic circulation are partly separated in adult amphibians. A single ventricle pumps blood to the lungs and to the rest of the body. Two atria receive blood returning to the heart. One receives oxygenated blood from the lungs, and the other receives deoxygenated blood from the body. Because both atria deliver blood to the same ventricle, the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood could mix so that blood going to the tissues would not carry a full load of oxygen. Mixing is limited, however, because anatomical features of the ventricle direct the flow of deoxygenated blood from the right atrium to the pulmonary circuit and the flow of oxygenated blood from the left atrium to the aorta. The advantage of this partial separation of pulmonary and systemic circulation is that the high resistance of the gas exchange organ no longer lies between the heart and the tissues. Therefore, the amphibian heart delivers blood to the aorta, and hence to the body, at a higher pressure than the fish heart does.49.2.3 Reptiles have exquisite control of pulmonary and systemic circulationTurtles, snakes, and lizards are commonly said to have three-chambered hearts, while crocodilians (crocodiles and alligators) are said to have four-chambered hearts. But this statement is an oversimplification. The hearts of all these animals have two separate atria and a ventricle that is divided in a complex way so that mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood is minimized. The most important and unusual feature of reptilian and crocodilian hearts is their ability to alter the distribution of blood going to the lungs and to the rest of the body. Consider the behavior, ecology, and physiology of these animals. Despite the common image of turtles as being slow and plodding, reptiles and crocodilians can be fast, active, powerful animals. They can also be inactive for long periods of time, during which they have metabolic rates much lower than the resting metabolic rates of birds and mammals. The enormous range of metabolic demands in these animals means that they do not have to breathe continuously. Some species are also accomplished divers and spend long periods underwater where they cannot breathe.
To understand the wonderful adaptations of the reptilian and crocodilian hearts, you have to realize that there is no benefit in sending blood to the lungs when an animal is not breathing. The hearts of these animals circulate blood through their lungs and then to the rest of their bodies when they are breathing, but when they are not breathing, they can bypass the lung circuit and pump all the blood around the body. How do they accomplish this switching? Reptiles have two aortas instead of one. The simplified representation of reptilian cardiovascular anatomy shows that the right aorta can receive blood from either the right side or the left side of the ventricle. When the animal is breathing air, two factors cause blood from the right side of the ventricle to go preferentially into the pulmonary circuit rather than into the systemic circuit. First, the resistance in the pulmonary circuit is lower than that in the systemic circuit. Second, there is a slight asynchrony in the timing of ventricular contraction, so the blood in the right side of the ventricle tends to be ejected slightly before the blood in the left side. Thus, as the ventricle contracts, the deoxygenated blood in the right side of the ventricle moves first into the lung circuit. When the oxygenated blood in the left side of the ventricle starts to move, it encounters resistance in the lung circuit, which is already filled with the deoxygenated blood from the right side. Therefore the blood from the left side tends to flow into the two aortas. When the reptile stops breathing, blood flow is rerouted by constriction of vessels in the lung circuit. As resistance in the lung circuit increases, the blood from the right side of the ventricle tends to be directed into one of the aortas. As a result, blood from both sides of the ventricle flows through the aortas to the systemic circuit. The ability of snakes, lizards, and turtles to redirect blood flow from the lung circuit to the systemic circuit depends on the incomplete division of their ventricles. Crocodilians have true four-chambered hearts with completely divided ventricles. Yet, the crocodilians have not lost the ability to shunt blood from the lung circuit when they are not breathing. The crocodilians have one aorta originating in the left ventricle and one aorta originating in the right ventricle. However, a short channel connects these two aortas just after they leave the heart.
Because the crocodilians' ventricles are separate, they can generate different pressures when they contract. When the animal is breathing, the pressure in the left ventricle and the left aorta is higher than the pressure in the right ventricle. This higher pressure is communicated through the connecting channel to the right aorta, and this high back pressure prevents right-ventricle blood from entering that aorta. As a result, both aortas carry blood from the left ventricle, and the blood from the right ventricle flows to the lung circuit. When the animal is not breathing, constriction of vessels in the lung circuit increases the resistance in that circuit. As a result, pressure builds up in the right ventricle to a level that exceeds the back pressure in the right aorta. Under these conditions, blood from both ventricles flows through the two aortas and the systemic circuit, and little blood flows into the lung circuit. You can now appreciate the fact that reptilian and crocodilian hearts are not primitive. Rather, these hearts and their major vessels are highly adapted to operate efficiently over a wide range of metabolic demands.49.2.4 Birds and mammals have fully separated pulmonary and systemic circuitsThe four-chambered hearts of birds and mammals completely separate their pulmonary and systemic circuits. Separate circuits have several advantages: oxygenated and deoxygenated blood cannot mix, and therefore, the systemic circuit is always receiving blood with the highest oxygen content. respiratory gas exchange is maximized because the blood with the lowest oxygen content and highest CO2 content is sent to the lungs. separate systemic and pulmonary circuits can operate at different pressures. The tissues of birds and mammals have high nutrient demands and thus a very high density of the smallest vessels, the capillaries. Many small vessels present lots of resistance to the flow of blood. Therefore, high pressure is required in the systemic circuits of birds and mammals. Their pulmonary circuits do not have as many capillaries and as high resistances as their systemic circuits, so the pulmonary circuits of birds and mammals can run at lower pressures. 49.3 The Human Heart: Two Pumps in OneLike all other mammalian hearts, the human heart has four chambers: two atria and two ventricles. The atrium and ventricle on the right side of your body are called the right atrium and right ventricle. They can be thought of as the right heart. The atrium and ventricle on the left side of your body are called the left atrium and left ventricle. They can be thought of as the left heart. The right heart pumps blood through the pulmonary circuit, and the left heart pumps blood through the systemic circuit. Valves between the atria and ventricles, the atrioventricular valves, prevent backflow of blood into the atria when the ventricles contract. The pulmonary valve and the aortic valve, positioned between the ventricles and the arteries, prevent the backflow of blood into the ventricles. In what follows, we'll first focus on the flow of blood through the heart and through the body. Then we'll examine the unique electrical properties of cardiac muscle and see how the heart's electrical activity can be recorded in an EKG (electrocardiogram).49.3.1 Blood flows from right heart to lungs to left heart to body 871Let's follow the circulation of the blood through the heart, starting in the right heart. The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava, large veins that collect blood from the upper and lower body, respectively. The veins of the heart itself also drain into the right atrium. From the right atrium, the blood flows into the right ventricle. Most of the filling of the ventricle is due to passive flow while the heart is relaxed between beats. Just at the end of this period of ventricular filling, the atrium contracts and adds a little more blood to the ventricular volume. The right ventricle then contracts, pumping blood into the pulmonary artery, which transports the blood to the lungs. The pulmonary veins return the oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium, from which the blood enters the left ventricle. As with the right side of the heart, most left ventricular filling is passive, and ventricular volume is topped off by contraction of the atrium just at the end of the period of filling. The walls of the left ventricle are powerful muscles that contract around the blood with a wringing motion starting from the bottom. When pressure in the left ventricle is high enough to push open the aortic valve, the blood rushes into the aorta to begin its circulation throughout the body and eventually back to the right atrium. Observe that the left ventricle is more massive than the right ventricle. Because there are many more arterioles and capillaries in the systemic circuit than in the pulmonary circuit, resistance is higher in the systemic circuit. and the left ventricle must squeeze with greater force than the right, even though both are pumping the same volume of blood. The pumping of the heart-the contraction of the two atria followed by the contraction of the two ventricles, and then relaxation-is the cardiac cycle. Contraction of the ventricles is called systole, and relaxation of the ventricles diastole. Just at the end of diastole, the atria contract and top off the volume of blood in the ventricles. The sounds of the cardiac cycle, the "lub-dub" heard through a stethoscope placed on the chest, are created by the slamming shut of the heart valves. The shutting and opening of these valves is simply a mechanical event resulting from pressure differences on the two sides of the valves. As the ventricles begin to contract, the pressure in the ventricles rises above the pressure in the atria, and the atrioventricular valves close ("lub"). When the ventricles begin to relax, the high back pressure in the aorta and pulmonary arteries causes the aortic and pulmonary valves to bang shut ("dub"). Defective valves produce the sounds of heart murmurs. For example, if an atrioventricular valve is defective, blood will flow back into the atrium with a "whoosh" sound following the "lub."
The cardiac cycle can be felt in the pulsation of arteries such as the one that supplies blood to your hand. You can feel your pulse by placing two fingers from one hand lightly over the wrist of the other hand just below the thumb. During systole, blood surges through the arteries of your arm and hand, and you can feel the surge as a pulsing of the artery in your wrist. Blood pressure changes associated with the cardiac cycle can be measured in the large artery in your arm by using an inflatable pressure cuff called a sphygmomanometer and a stethoscope. This method measures the minimum pressure necessary to compress an artery so that blood does not flow through it at all (the systolic value) and the minimum pressure that permits intermittent flow through the artery (the diastolic value). In a conventional blood pressure reading, the systolic value is placed over the diastolic value. Normal values for a young adult might be 120 mm of mercury (Hg) during systole and 80 mm Hg during diastole, or 120/80.49.3.2 The heartbeat originates in the cardiac muscleCardiac muscle, as we saw in Chapter 47, has some unique properties that allow it to function as an effective pump. First, the cardiac muscle cells are in electrical continuity with each other. Gap junctions enable action potentials to spread rapidly from cell to cell. Because a spreading action potential stimulates contraction, large groups of cardiac muscle cells contract in unison. This coordinated contraction is important for pumping blood. Second, some cardiac muscle cells have the ability to initiate action potentials without stimulation from the nervous system. These cells stimulate neighboring cells to contract, thereby acting as pacemakers. The important characteristic of a pacemaker cell is that its resting membrane potential gradually becomes less negative until it reaches the threshold voltage for initiating an action potential. These action potentials look different from the neuronal action potentials you saw in Chapter 41 because the depolarization is due primarily to the opening of voltage-gated calcium channels rather than voltage-gated sodium channels. Like neurons, cardiac muscle repolarizes in part by opening potassium channels. The potassium channels in cardiac pacemaker cells, however, are unique. After an action potential, they open, causing the membrane potential to fall to its most negative level. Then they gradually close, and as they do so, the membrane potential becomes less negative-it slowly depolarizes. Sodium and calcium channels contribute to this gradual depolarization between action potentials. When membrane potential reaches threshold for the voltage-gated calcium channels, another action potential occurs. The nervous system controls the heartbeat (speeds it up or slows it down) by influencing the rate at which pacemaker cells gradually depolarize between action potentials. Acetylcholine released by parasympathetic nerve endings onto the pacemaker cells slows their rate of depolarization and thereby slows the heart rate. Norepinephrine released by sympathetic nerve endings onto the pacemaker cells increases their rate of depolarization and thereby speeds the heart rate.
Under normal circumstances, the heartbeat originates from pacemaker cells located at the junction of the superior vena cava and right atrium, in the sinoatrial node. An action potential spreads from the sinoatrial node across the atrial walls, causing the two atria to contract in unison. Since there are no gap junctions between the atria and the ventricles, however, this depolarization does not flow directly to the ventricles, and the ventricles do not contract in unison with the atria. The action potential initiated in the atria passes to the ventricles through another node of modified cardiac muscle cells, the atrioventricular node. The atrioventricular node passes the action potential on to the ventricles via modified muscle fibers called the bundle of His. The bundle of His divides into right and left branches, which connect with Purkinje fibers that branch throughout the ventricular muscle. The timing of the spread of the action potential from atria to ventricles is important. The atrioventricular node imposes a short delay in the spread of the action potential from atria to ventricles. Then the action potential spreads very rapidly throughout the ventricles, causing them to contract. Thus the atria contract before the ventricles do, so the blood passes progressively from the atria to the ventricles to the arteries.49.3.3 The EKG records the electrical activity of the heartElectrical events in the cardiac muscle during the cardiac cycle can be recorded by electrodes placed on the surface of the body. Such a recording is called an electrocardiogram, or EKG ("EKG" because the Greek word for heart is kardia, but "ECG" is also used). The EKG is an important tool for diagnosing heart problems. The action potentials that sweep through the muscles of the atria and the ventricles before they contract are such massive, localized electrical events that they cause electric currents to flow outward from the heart to all parts of the body. Electrodes placed on the surface of the body at different locations-usually on the wrists and ankles-detect those electric currents at different times and therefore register a voltage difference. The appearance of the EKG depends on the exact placement of the electrodes used for the recording. The waves of the EKG are designated P, Q, R, S, and T, each letter representing a particular event in the cardiac muscle. The EKG is used by cardiologists (heart specialists) to diagnose heart problems. For patients who have had heart attacks, it is possible to determine which region of the heart has been damaged by placing electrodes at different locations on the chest. Comparing EKGs from the different electrodes tells the cardiologist which region of the heart is behaving abnormally. 49.4 The Vascular System: Arteries, Capillaries, and VeinsBlood circulates throughout the body in a system of blood vessels: arteries, capillaries, and veins. Arteries receive blood from the heart; accordingly, they are built to withstand high pressures. Arteries are important in controlling blood pressure and in the distribution of blood to different organs. Veins return blood to the heart at low pressures and serve as a blood reservoir. The capillaries are the site of all exchanges between the blood and the internal environment. In this section, we see how the structure of each of these vessel types supports its functions. In addition to arteries, capillaries, and veins, we consider another set of vessels, the lymphatic vessels, which return tissue fluid to the blood.49.4.1 Arteries and arterioles have abundant elastic and muscle fibersThe walls of the large arteries have many elastic fibers that enable them to withstand high pressures 10). These elastic fibers have another important function as well: During systole, they are stretched, and thereby store some of the energy imparted to the blood by the heart. During diastole, they return this energy by squeezing the blood and pushing it forward. As a result, even though the flow of blood through the arterial system pulsates, it is smoother than it would be through a system of rigid pipes. Smooth muscle cells in the arteries and arterioles make the diameter of those vessels variable. When their diameter changes, their resistance to blood flow changes as well, and the amount of blood flowing through them changes as a result. By influencing the contraction of the smooth muscle in the walls of arteries and arterioles, neural and hormonal mechanisms can control the distribution of blood to the different tissues of the bodyas well as central blood pressure. The arteries and arterioles are referred to as the resistance vessels because their resistance varies.49.4.2 Materials are exchanged between blood and tissue fluid in the capillariesBeds of capillaries lie between arterioles and venules. No cell of the body is more than a couple of cell diameters away from a capillary. The needs of the cells are served by the exchange of materials between blood and tissue fluid across the capillary walls. Capillaries have thin, permeable walls, and blood flows through them slowly, facilitating this exchange. To anyone who has played with a garden hose, it may seem strange that blood flows through the large arteries rapidly at high pressures, but when it reaches the small capillaries, the pressure and rate of flow decrease. When you restrict the diameter of a garden hose by placing your thumb over the opening, the pressure in the hose increases, which in turn increases the velocity of the water spraying out of the hose. This puzzle is solved by two more pieces of information. First, arterioles are highly branched. When one is restricted, blood flows into other branches, so pressure does not build up quickly. Second, each arteriole gives rise to many, many capillaries. Even though each capillary has a diameter so small that red blood cells must pass through in single file, there are so many capillaries that their total cross-sectional area is much greater than that of any other class of vessel. As a result, all of the capillaries together have a much greater capacity for blood than do the arterioles. Returning to our garden hose analogy, if we connect the hose to many junctions leading to small irrigation tubes, the pressure and the flow in each of the irrigation tubes will be quite low.49.4.3 Materials are exchanged in capillary beds by filtration, osmosis, and diffusionThe walls of capillaries are made of a single layer of thin endothelial cells. In most tissues of the body other than the brain, these tubes of endothelial cells have tiny holes called fenestrations. Surrounding the endothelial cells is a very permeable basal lamina. So, capillaries are leaky. They are permeable to water, to some ions, and to some small molecules, but not to large molecules such as proteins. Blood pressure therefore tends to squeeze water and some solutes out of the capillaries and into the surrounding intercellular spaces. This process is called filtration. The large molecules that cannot cross the capillary wall create a difference in osmotic potential (also called osmotic pressure) between the plasma and the tissue fluid, which tends to draw water back into the capillary. Recent research suggests that bicarbonate ions in the capillary plasma are an important contributor to the osmotic attraction of water back into the capillary. As we saw in Chapter 48, CO2 diffuses into the plasma as the blood flows through the capillary. The conversion of this CO2 to bicarbonate ions is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase. Therefore, there is a rise in bicarbonate concentration as blood flows through the capillary, and this increased concentration contributes to the resorption of water from the tissue fluid. Blood pressure is highest on the arterial side of a capillary bed and steadily decreases as the blood flows to the venous side. Therefore, more water is squeezed out of the capillaries on the arterial side of the bed. The osmotic potential pulling water back into the capillary rises as blood flows toward the venous side. Gradually, osmotic potential becomes the dominant force, pulling water back into the plasma. The interaction of these two opposing forces-blood pressure versus osmotic potential-determines the net flow of water between the plasma and the tissue fluid.
The balance between blood pressure and osmotic potential changes if the blood pressure in the arterioles or the permeability of the capillary walls changes. Such a change leads to the inflammation that accompanies injuries to the skin or allergic reactions. A major mediator of inflammation is a hormone called histamine that is released mainly by white blood cells, called mast cells, that move to the damaged tissue (see Chapter 41). Histamine relaxes the smooth muscle of the arterioles, thus increasing blood flow to the damaged tissue and increasing pressure in the capillaries. Histamine also increases the permeability of the capillaries, so that more water leaves the vessels. The accumulation of fluid in the intercellular spaces causes the tissue to swell, a condition known as edema. The use of drugs called antihistamines can alleviate inflammation and allergic reactions. The loss of water from capillaries increases if the protein content of the blood decreases, as is seen in cases of liver failure due to alcoholism or liver disease. The liver is the major producer of blood proteins, and when it fails, blood protein levels fall. With a lower protein concentration in the plasma, there is less of an osmotic potential to pull water back into the capillaries. The result is that tissue fluid builds up, swelling the abdomen and the extremities. 
Which specific small molecules can cross a capillary wall depends on the architecture of the capillary, the type of substance, and the concentration gradient of the substance between the blood and the tissue fluid. Capillary walls consist of the plasma membranes of endothelial cells and, as mentioned, may have actual holes (fenestrations) in them. Therefore, lipid-soluble substances and many small solute molecules can pass through them from an area of higher concentration to one of lower concentration. The capillaries in different tissues, however, are differentially selective as to the sizes of molecules that can pass through them. In all capillaries, O2, CO2, glucose, lactate, and small ions such as Na+ and Cl- can cross. The capillaries of the brain do not have fenestrations, and therefore not much else can pass through them unless it is a lipid-soluble substance such as alcohol. This high selectivity of brain capillaries is known as the blood-brain barrier (see Chapter 44). In other tissues, the capillaries are much less selective. Such capillaries are found in the digestive tract, where nutrients are absorbed, and in the kidneys, where wastes are filtered. Some capillaries have large gaps that permit the movement of even larger substances, such as red blood cells. These capillaries are found in the bone marrow, spleen, and liver. Substances move across many capillary walls by endocytosis.49.4.4 Lymphatic vessels return tissue fluid to the bloodThe tissue fluid that accumulates outside the capillaries contains water and small molecules, but no red blood cells, and less protein than there is in blood. A separate system of vessels-the lymphatic system-returns tissue fluid to the blood. After entering the lymphatic vessels, the tissue fluid is called lymph. Fine lymphatic capillaries merge progressively into larger and larger vessels and end in a major vessel-the thoracic duct-that empties into the superior vena cava, returning blood to the heart. Lymphatic vessels have one-way valves that keep the lymph flowing toward the thoracic duct. The force propelling the lymph is pressure on the lymphatic vessels from the contractions of nearby skeletal muscles. Mammals and birds have lymph nodes along the major lymphatic vessels. Lymph nodes are an important component of the defensive machinery of the body. They are a major site of lymphocyte production and of the phagocytic action that removes microorganisms and other foreign materials from the circulation. The lymph nodes also act as mechanical filters. Particles become trapped there and are digested by the phagocytes that are abundant in the nodes. Lymph nodes swell during infection. Some of them, particularly those on the sides of the neck or in the armpits, become noticeable when they swell. The nodes also trap metastasized cancer cells-that is, those that have broken free of the original tumor. Because such cells may start additional tumors, surgeons often remove the neighboring lymph nodes when they excise a malignant tumor.49.4.5 Blood flows back to the heart through veinsThe pressure of the blood flowing from capillaries to venules is extremely low, and is insufficient to propel blood back to the heart. Blood tends to accumulate in veins, and the walls of veins are more expandable than the walls of arteries. As much as 80 percent of the total blood volume may be in the veins at any one time. Because of their high capacity to store blood, veins are called capacitance vessels. Blood must be returned from the veins to the heart so that circulation can continue. If the veins are above the level of the heart, gravity helps blood flow, but below the level of the heart, blood must be moved against the pull of gravity. If too much blood remains in the veins, then too little blood returns to the heart, and thus too little blood is pumped to the brain; a person may faint as a result. Fainting is self-correcting: A fainting person falls, thereby moving out of the position in which gravity caused blood to accumulate in the lower body. But means other than fainting also move blood from the tissues back to the heart. The most important of the forces that propel venous and lymphatic return from the regions of the body below the heart is the squeezing of the vessels by the contractions of surrounding skeletal muscles. As muscles contract, the vessels are compressed, and the blood is squeezed through them. Blood flow might be temporarily obstructed during a prolonged muscle contraction, but with relaxation of the muscles the blood is free to move again. One-way valves within the veins prevent the backflow of blood. Thus whenever a vein is squeezed, blood is propelled forward toward the heart. As we have already noted, the lymphatic vessels have similar one-way valves. Gravity causes blood accumulation in veins and edema. The back pressure that builds up in the capillaries when blood accumulates in the veins shifts the balance between blood pressure and osmotic potential so that there is a net movement of fluid into the intercellular spaces. That is why you have trouble putting your shoes back on after you sit for a long time with your shoes off, such as on an airline flight. In persons with very expandable veins, the veins may become so stretched that the valves can no longer prevent backflow. This condition produces varicose (swollen) veins. Draining of these veins is highly desirable and can be aided by wearing support hose and periodically elevating the legs above the level of the heart.
During exercise, the squeezing action of muscles on veins speeds blood toward the heart to be pumped to the lungs and then to the respiring tissues. As an animal runs, its legs act as auxiliary vascular pumps, returning blood to the heart from the veins of the lower body. As a greater volume of blood is returned to the heart, the heart contracts more forcefully, and its pumping action becomes more effective. This strengthening of the heartbeat is due to a property of cardiac muscle cells referred to as the Frank-Starling law: If the cells are stretched, as they are when the volume of returning blood increases, they contract more forcefully. This principle holds (within a certain range) whenever venous return increases, by any mechanism. The actions of breathing also help return venous blood to the heart. The ventilatory muscles create suction that pulls air into the lungs (see Chapter 48), and this suction also pulls blood and lymph toward the chest, increasing venous return to the right atrium. Some smooth muscles in the walls of veins move venous blood back to the heart by constricting the veins and moving the blood forward. These muscles are rare in most veins and are totally absent from lymphatic vessels in humans. They do not play a major role in venous return. However, in the largest veins closest to the heart, contraction of smooth muscles at the onset of exercise can suddenly increase venous return and stimulate the heart in accord with the Frank-Starling law, thus increasing cardiac output.49.4.6 Will you die of cardiovascular disease?Cardiovascular disease is by far the largest single killer in the United States and Europe; it is responsible for about half of all deaths each year. The immediate cause of most of these deaths is heart attack or stroke, but those events are the end result of a disease called atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) that begins many years before symptoms are detected. Hence atherosclerosis is called the "silent killer." What is atherosclerosis, and how can it be prevented? Healthy arteries have a smooth internal lining of endothelial cells. This lining can be damaged by chronic high blood pressure, smoking, a high-fat diet, or microorganisms. Deposits called plaque begin to form at sites of endothelial damage. First the endothelial cells at the damaged site swell and proliferate; then they are joined by smooth muscle cells migrating from below. Lipids, especially cholesterol, are deposited in these cells, so the plaque becomes fatty. Fibrous connective tissue invades the plaque and, along with deposits of calcium, makes the artery wall less elastic; this process is what gives us the terms "atherosclerosis" and "hardening of the arteries." The growing plaque narrows the artery and causes turbulence in the blood flowing over it. Blood platelets (discussed later in this chapter) stick to the plaque and initiate the formation of a blood clot, called a thrombus, which further blocks the artery.
The blood supply to the heart itself flows through the coronary arteries. These arteries are highly susceptible to atherosclerosis; as they narrow, blood flow to the heart muscles decreases. Chest pains and shortness of breath during mild exertion are symptoms of this condition. A person with atherosclerosis is at high risk of forming a thrombus in a coronary artery. This condition, called coronary thrombosis, can totally block the vessel, causing a heart attack, or coronary infarction. A piece of a thrombus that breaks loose, called an embolus, is likely to travel to and become lodged in a vessel of smaller diameter, blocking its flow (a condition referred to as an embolism). Arteries already narrowed by plaque formation are likely places for an embolus to lodge. An embolism in an artery in the brain causes the cells fed by that artery to die. This event is called a stroke. The specific damage resulting from a stroke, such as memory loss, speech impairment, or paralysis, depends on the location of the blocked artery. The most important approach to cardiovascular disease is prevention, not treatment. Probably the most important determinant of whether or not you will get atherosclerosis is your genetic predisposition. Environmental risk factors also play a large role, however, and if you do have a genetic predisposition to atherosclerosis, it is even more important to minimize environmental risk factors. These factors include high-fat and high-cholesterol diets, smoking, a sedentary lifestyle, hypertension (high blood pressure), obesity, and certain medical conditions such as diabetes. Changes in diet and behavior can prevent and reverse atherosclerosis and help fend off the silent killer. 49.5 Blood: A Fluid TissueBlood is classified as a connective tissue: it has cellular elements suspended in an extracellular matrix of complex, yet specific, composition. The unusual feature of blood is that the extracellular matrix is a liquid, so blood is a fluid tissue. The cells of the blood can be separated from the fluid matrix, called plasma, by centrifugation. If a 100-ml sample of blood is spun in a centrifuge, all the cells move to the bottom of the tube, leaving the straw-colored, clear plasma on top. The packed-cell volume, or hematocrit, is the percentage of the blood volume made up by cells. Normal hematocrit is about 38 percent for women and 46 percent for men, but these values can vary considerably. They are usually higher, for example, in people who live and work at high altitudes because the low oxygen concentrations at high altitudes stimulate the production of more red blood cells. In this section, we consider two classes of cellular elements in blood: the red blood cells and the platelets, which are pinched-off fragments of cells. We have already studied the other important class of blood cells-white blood cells, or leucocytes-in Chapter 19. Finally, we take a closer look at the content of plasma.49.5.1 Red blood cells transport respiratory gasesMost of the cells in the blood are erythrocytes, or red blood cells. Mature red blood cells are biconcave, flexible discs packed with hemoglobin. Their function is to transport the respiratory gases. Their shape gives them a large surface area for gas exchange, and their flexibility enables them to squeeze through narrow capillaries. There are about 5 to 6 million red blood cells per microliter (a cubic milliliter) of blood. Red blood cells are generated by special cells in the bone marrow called stem cells, particularly in the bone marrow of the ribs, breastbone, pelvis, and vertebrae 16a). Red blood cell production is controlled by a hormone, erythropoietin, which is released by cells in the kidney in response to insufficient oxygen (hypoxia) in the tissues 16b). Many tissues respond to hypoxia by expressing a transcription factor called hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). In the kidney, HIF-1 activates the gene encoding erythropoietin. Cells in the kidney produce erythropoietin, which stimulates the stem cells to produce red blood cells. Under normal conditions, your bone marrow produces about 2 million red blood cells every second. The developing, immature red blood cells divide many times while still in the bone marrow, and during this time they produce hemoglobin. When the hemoglobin content of a red blood cell approaches about 30 percent, its nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and mitochondria begin to break down. This process is almost complete when the new red blood cell squeezes between the endothelial cells of capillaries in the bone marrow and enters the circulation. Each red blood cell circulates for about 120 days and then breaks down. As it gets older, its membrane becomes less flexible and more fragile. Therefore, old red blood cells frequently rupture as they bend to fit through narrow capillaries. One place where they are really squeezed is in the spleen, an organ that sits near the stomach in the upper left side of the abdominal cavity. The spleen has many venous cavities, or sinuses, that serve as a reservoir for red blood cells, but to get into the sinuses, the red blood cells must squeeze between spleen cells. Old red blood cells are likely to be ruptured by this squeezing, and when they are, their remnants are broken down by macrophages.49.5.2 Platelets are essential for blood clottingBesides producing red blood cells, the stem cells in the bone marrow produce the leucocytes and cells called megakaryocytes. Megakaryocytes are large cells that remain in the bone marrow and continually break off cell fragments called platelets. A platelet is just a tiny fragment of a cell, but it is packed with enzymes and chemicals necessary for its function: sealing leaks in blood vesselsand initiating blood clotting. Damage to a blood vessel exposes collagen fibers. When a platelet encounters collagen fibers, it is activated. It swells, becomes irregularly shaped and sticky, and releases chemicals that activate other platelets and initiate the clotting of blood. The sticky platelets form a plug at the damaged site, and the subsequent clotting forms a stronger patch on the vessel. The clotting of blood requires many steps and many clotting factors. The absence of any one of these factors can impair clotting and cause excessive bleeding. Because the liver produces most of the clotting factors, liver diseases such as hepatitis and cirrhosis can result in excessive bleeding. The sex-linked trait hemophilia (see Chapter 10) is an example of a genetic inability to produce one of the clotting factors. Blood clotting factors participate in a cascade of steps that activate other substances circulating in the blood. The cascade begins with cell damage and platelet activation and leads to the conversion of an inactive circulating enzyme, prothrombin, to its active form, thrombin. Thrombin causes molecules of a plasma protein called fibrinogen to polymerize and form fibrin threads. The fibrin threads form the meshwork that clots the blood, seals the vessel, and provides a scaffold for the formation of scar tissue.49.5.3 Plasma is a complex solutionPlasma, the clear straw-colored liquid portion of the blood, contains gases, ions, nutrient molecules, proteins, and other molecules, such as nonprotein hormones. Most of the ions are Na+ and Cl- (hence the salty taste of blood), but many other ions are also present. Nutrient molecules in plasma include glucose, amino acids, lipids, cholesterol, and lactic acid. The circulating proteins in plasma have many functions. We have just noted proteins that function in blood clotting; others of interest include albumin, which is partly responsible for the osmotic potential in capillaries that prevents a massive loss of water from plasma to intercellular spaces; antibodies (the immunoglobulins); hormones; and various carrier molecules, such as transferrin, which carries iron from the gut to where it is stored or used. Plasma is very similar to tissue fluid in composition, and most of its components move readily between these two fluid compartments of the body. The main difference between the two fluids is the higher concentration of proteins in the plasma. 49.6 Control and Regulation of CirculationThe circulatory system is controlled and regulated by neural and hormonal mechanisms at both the local and systemic levels. Every tissue requires an adequate supply of blood that is saturated withoxygen, carries essential nutrients, and is relatively free of waste products. The nervous system cannot monitor and control every capillary bed in the body. Instead, each tissue regulates its own blood flow through autoregulatory mechanisms that cause the arterioles supplying the tissue to constrict or dilate. The autoregulatory actions of every capillary bed in every tissue influence the pressure and composition of the arterial blood leaving the heart. If many arterioles suddenly dilate, for example, allowing blood to flow through many more capillary beds, arterial blood pressure falls. If all the newly filled capillary beds contribute metabolic waste products to the blood at one time, the concentration of wastes in the blood returning to the heart increases. Thus events in all the capillary beds throughout the body produce combined effects on arterial blood pressure and blood composition. The nervous and endocrine systems respond to these changes by changing breathing, heart rate, and blood distribution to match the metabolic needs of the body.49.6.1 Autoregulation matches local flow to local needThe autoregulatory mechanisms that adjust the flow of blood to a tissue are part of the tissue itself, but they can be influenced by the nervous system and certain hormones. The amount of blood that flows through a capillary bed is controlled by the degree of contraction of the smooth muscle of the arteries and arterioles feeding that bed. Blood flows into the bed from an arteriole. Smooth muscle "cuffs," or precapillary sphincters, on the arteriole can completely shut off the supply of blood to the capillary bed. When the precapillary sphincters are relaxed and the arteriole is open, the arterial blood pressure pushes blood into the capillaries. Autoregulation depends on the sensitivity of the smooth muscle to its chemical environment. Low O2 concentrations and high CO2 concentrations cause the smooth muscle to relax, thus increasing the supply of blood, which brings in more O2 and carries away CO2. Increases in other by-products of metabolism, such as lactate, hydrogen ions, potassium, and adenosine, promote increased blood flow through the same mechanism. Hence, activities that increase the metabolism of a tissue also increase blood flow to that tissue.49.6.2 Arterial pressure is controlled and regulated by hormonal and neural mechanisms 882The same smooth muscle of arteries and arterioles that responds to autoregulatory stimuli also responds to signals from the endocrine and central nervous systems. Most arteries and arterioles are innervated by the autonomic nervous system, particularly the sympathetic division. Most sympathetic neurons release norepinephrine, which causes the smooth muscle cells to contract, thus constricting the vessels and reducing blood flow. An exception is found in skeletal muscle, in which specialized sympathetic neurons release acetylcholine, causing the smooth muscle of the arterioles to relax and the vessels to dilate, increasing blood to flow to the muscle. Hormones also can cause arterioles to constrict. Epinephrine, which has actions similar to those of norepinephrine, is released from the adrenal medulla during massive sympathetic activation-the fight-or-flight response. Angiotensin, produced when blood pressure in the kidneys falls, causes arterioles to constrict. Vasopressin, released by the posterior pituitary when blood pressure falls, has similar effects. These hormones influence arterioles located for the most part in peripheral tissues (extremities) or in tissues whose functions need not be maintained continuously (such as the gut). By reducing blood flow in those arterioles, the hormones increase central blood pressure and blood flow to essential organs such as the heart, brain, and kidneys. The autonomic nervous system activity that controls heart rate and constriction of blood vessels originates in cardiovascular centers in the medulla of the brain stem. Many inputs converge on this central integrative network and influence the commands it issues via parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves. Of special importance is information about changes in blood pressure from stretch receptors in the walls of the great arteries leading to the brain-the aorta and the carotid arteries.
Increased activity in the stretch receptors indicates rising blood pressure and inhibits sympathetic nervous system output. As a result, the heart slows, and arterioles in peripheral tissues dilate. If pressure in the great arteries falls, the activity of the stretch receptors decreases, stimulating sympathetic output. As a result, the heart beats faster, and the arterioles in peripheral tissues constrict. When arterial pressure falls, the change in stretch receptor activity also causes the hypothalamus to release vasopressin, which helps increase blood pressure by stimulating peripheral arterioles to constrict. You experience the action of the aortic and carotid stretch receptors when you get up each morning. While you are lying down, your blood pressure is rather evenly distributed from head to toe, but when you get up, gravity pulls blood to the lower part of your body. Blood return to the heart decreases, and therefore cardiac output decreases. As a result, the pressure in the aorta and the carotid arteries falls. This change is detected by the carotid and aortic stretch receptors, which stimulate corrective responses within two heartbeats. Now, imagine the change in blood pressure detected by the carotid stretch receptors in the giraffe on the cover of this book when it raises and lowers its head. The giraffe has a much larger heart than would be expected for a mammal of its size because of the need to generate blood pressure sufficient to pump blood against gravity to a height more than 3 m above its heart. Other information that causes the medullary regulatory system to increase heart rate and blood pressure comes from chemoreceptors in the carotid and aortic bodies. These nodules of modified smooth muscle tissue respond to inadequate O2 supply. If arterial blood flow slows or the O2 content of the arterial blood falls drastically, these receptors are activated and send signals to the regulatory center. The regulatory center also receives input from other brain areas. Emotions or the anticipation of intense activity, as at the start of a race, can cause the center to increase heart rate and blood pressure. Control and regulation in the cardiovascular system begins with the local autoregulatory mechanisms that cause dilation of local arterioles and precapillary sphincters when a tissue needs more oxygen or has accumulated wastes. As more blood flows into the tissues, the central blood pressure falls, and the composition of the blood returning to the heart reflects the exchanges that are occuring in the tissues. Changes in central blood pressure and blood composition are sensed, and both endocrine and central nervous system responses are activated to return blood pressure and composition to normal. Thus circulatory functions are matched to the regional and overall needs of the body.49.6.3 Cardiovascular control in diving mammals conserves oxygenWe began this chapter with the observation that when a seal begins underwater activity, its heart rate slows and blood flow to all of its tissues except its brain drops dramatically. This "diving reflex" of marine mammals is in stark contrast to our increase in heart rate and blood flow when we begin exercise. The obvious difference between the situation of the seal and the human is that the human has access to atmospheric oxygen during exercise and the diving seal does not. The adaptations of the seal that enable it to remain underwater for a long time are several. The seal's oxygen storage capacity is about twice ours due to greater blood volume, the greater oxygen carrying capacity of its blood, and more myoglobin in its muscles. That is not sufficient, however, to explain dives of half an hour or more. The most important adaptation is the diving reflex, which is a slowing of the heart and a constriction of major blood vessels going to all tissues except certain critical ones such as the nervous system, the heart, and the eyes. Central blood pressure remains high, but blood flow to the tissues decreases. This reduced blood flow has two effects: one is to switch the tissue to glycolytic (anaerobic) metabolism, and the other is to suppress the metabolism of the tissue. While diving, the seal accumulates lactic acid in its muscles, which constitutes an "oxygen debt" to be paid back through elevated metabolism after the dive ends. But the total metabolic "payback" is much less than the metabolism that would have occurred over the same period of time had the seal not dived. The diving reflex caused the seal to be hypometabolic (below the basal metabolic rate) during the dive. Hypometabolism, increased oxygen stores, and a high capacity for anaerobic metabolism make it possible for the seal to perform amazing feats.50 Animal NutritionThe Center for Disease Control has recently determined that one out of every five people in the United States is obese-at least 30 percent over recommended body mass. This epidemic level of obesity reflects a dramatic increase: Less than 10 years ago, the number was one in eight. The CDC has placed obesity just below smoking as the second largest preventable cause of death. Yet, as a nation, we seem to be more health-conscious than ever before, and at the time of this writing, six diet books are on the New York Times bestseller list. So what is wrong? Lifestyle changes have played a role. The consumption of "fast food" with a high fat content has risen, snack foods are more prevalent, and people have become more sedentary overall in spite of an increase in planned exercise. Yet different individuals exposed to the same routines and stimuli differ in their propensity to gain weight. Like all other physiological functions, food intake is under genetic and regulatory influences that we are just beginning to understand. In humans, we know that identical twins reared together or apart rarely differ in body mass by more than a few percent. In animals, and now in humans, we know of single-gene mutations that can cause excessive food intake and obesity, and we know of tiny brain areas that when damaged can cause increased or decreased food intake. Can knowledge of nutrition and the physiology of food intake help us fight the epidemic of obesity? In this chapter we review the nutrients that organisms require for energy, for molecular building blocks, and for specific biochemical functions. We examine briefly the diversity of adaptations for acquiring and ingesting food. Most of the chapter is devoted to how food is digested and absorbed. Then we learn how the body regulates its traffic in metabolic fuels, and return to the quandaries we have just posed about the regulation of food intake and body mass. Last, we raise the issue of environmental toxicology. By taking in nutrients as food, animals also take in compounds that can be toxic. We briefly consider how animals deal with toxic compounds and how human activities that contribute new and highly dangerous toxic compounds to the environment are affecting human health and other organisms in the environment. 50.1 Nutrient RequirementsAnimals must eat to stay alive. They eat other organisms-both plants and animals. Since they derive their nutrition from other organisms, they are called heterotrophs. In contrast, autotrophs (most plants, some bacteria, and some protists) trap solar energy through photosynthesis and use that energy to synthesize all of their components. Directly or indirectly, heterotrophs take advantage of-indeed, depend on-the organic synthesis carried out by autotrophs. Heterotrophs have evolved an enormous diversity of adaptations to exploit, directly or indirectly, the resources made available through the actions of autotrophs. In this section we discover how animals use nutrients for energy and to build more complex molecules. We also examine mineral nutrients, such as iron and calcium, and molecules called vitamins that animals need in small quantities.50.1.1 Energy can be measured in caloriesIn Chapters 6 and 7, we learned that energy in the chemical bonds of food molecules is transferred to the high-energy phosphate bonds of ATP. ATP provides the energy for cellular work. Each conversion of energy from food molecules to ATP and from ATP to cellular work is inefficient; in fact, most of the energy that was in the food is lost as heat. Even the useful energy conversions eventually are reduced to heat, as molecules that were synthesized are broken down and the energy of movement is dissipated by friction. In time, all the energy that is transferred to ATP from the chemical bonds of food molecules is released to the environment as heat. Therefore, we can talk about the energy requirements of animals and the energy content of food in terms of a measure of heat energy: the calorie. A calorie is the amount of heat necessary to raise the temperature of 1 g of water 1_C. Since this value is a tiny amount of energy in comparison to the energy requirements of many animals, physiologists commonly use the kilocalorie (kcal) as a unit of measure (1 kcal = 1,000 calories). Nutritionists also use the kilocalorie as a standard unit of energy, but they traditionally refer to it as the Calorie, which is always capitalized to distinguish it from the single calorie. (Scientists are gradually abandoning the calorie as an energy unit as they switch to the International System of Units. In this system, the basic unit of energy is the joule: 1 calorie = 4.184 joules.) The metabolic rate of an animal (see Chapter 40) is a measure of the overall energy needs that must be met by the animal's ingestion and digestion of food. The components of food that provide energy are fats, carbohydrates, and proteins. Fats yield 9.5 kcal/g, carbohydrates 4.2 kcal/g, and proteins about 4.1 kcal/g. The basal metabolic rate of a human (the metabolic rate resulting from all of the essential physiological functions of a resting person) is about 1,300-1,500 kcal/day for an adult female and 1,600-1,800 kcal/day for an adult male. Physical activity adds to this basal energy requirement. For a person doing sedentary work, about 30 percent of total energy consumption is due to skeletal muscle activity, and for a person doing heavy physical labor, 80 percent or more of the total caloric expenditure is due to skeletal muscle activity.50.1.2 Sources of energy can be stored in the bodyAlthough the cells of the body use energy continuously, most animals do not eat continuously. Humans generally eat several meals a day, a lion may eat once in several days, a boa constrictor may eat once a month, and hibernating animals may go 5 to 6 months without eating. Therefore, animals must store fuel molecules that can be released as needed between meals. Carbohydrates are stored in liver and muscle cells as glycogen ("animal starch," see Chapter, but the total glycogen store is usually not more than the equivalent of a day's energy requirements. Fat is the most important form of stored energy in the bodies of animals. Not only does fat have the highest energy content per gram, but it can be stored with little associated water, making it more compact. If migrating birds had to store energy as glycogen rather than fat to fuel their long flights, they would be too heavy to fly! Protein is not used to store energy, although body protein can be metabolized as an energy source of last resort. If an animal takes in too little food to meet its needs for metabolic energy, it is undernourished, and must make up the shortfall by metabolizing some of the molecules of its own body. Consumption of self for fuel begins with the storage compounds glycogen and fat. Protein loss is minimized for as long as possible, but eventually a starving animal uses its own proteins for fuel. The breakdown of body proteins impairs body functions and eventually leads to death. Blood proteins are among the first to go, resulting in loss of fluid to the intercellular spaces (edema; see Chapter 49). Muscles atrophy (waste away), and eventually even brain protein is lost. Undernourishment is rampant among people in nonindustrialized and war-torn nations, and a billion people-one-sixth of the world's population-are undernourished. (Ironically, one cause of life-threatening undernourishment in Western nations is a self-imposed starvation syndrome called anorexia nervosa that results from a psychological aversion to body fat.) When an animal consistently takes in more food than it needs to meet its energy demands, it is overnourished. The excess nutrients are stored as increased body mass. First, glycogen reserves build up; then additional dietary carbohydrates, fats, and proteins are converted to body fat. In some species, such as hibernators, seasonal overnutrition is an important adaptation for surviving periods when food is unavailable. In humans, however, overnutrition can be a serious health hazard, increasing the risk of high blood pressure, heart attack, diabetes, and other disorders.50.1.3 Food provides carbon skeletons for biosynthesisEvery animal requires certain basic organic molecules (carbon skeletons) that it cannot synthesize for itself, but needs to build its own complex organic molecules. An example of a required carbon skeleton is the acetyl group. Animals cannot make acetyl groups from carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen molecules; they obtain acetyl groups by metabolizing carbohydrates, fats, or proteins. The acetyl group can be derived from the metabolism of almost any food. It is unlikely ever to be in short supply for an adequately nourished animal.Other carbon skeletons, however, are derived from more limited sources, and an animal can suffer a deficiency of these materials even if its caloric intake is adequate. This state of deficiency is called malnutrition. Amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, are a good example of carbon skeletons that can be in short supply. Humans obtain amino acids by breaking down proteins from food and absorbing the resulting amino acids. Another source of amino acids is the breakdown of existing body proteins, which are in constant turnover as the tissues of the body undergo normal remodeling and renewal. From these amino acids and ones from food, the body synthesizes its own protein molecules as specified by its DNA. Animals can synthesize some of their own amino acids by taking carbon skeletons synthesized from acetyl or other groups and transferring to them amino groups (;sbNH2) derived from other amino acids. But most animals cannot synthesize all the amino acids they need. Each species has certain essential amino acids that must be obtained from food. Different species have different essential amino acids, and in general, herbivores have fewer essential amino acids than carnivores have. If an animal does not take in one of its essential amino acids, its protein synthesis is impaired. Think of protein synthesis as using a keyboard to write a story. If one letter on the keyboard doesn't function, the story either comes to a stop or has an error in it wherever that letter is needed. In protein synthesis, the story usually comes to a stop, and a functional protein is not produced. There are eight essential amino acids that humans must obtain from their food: isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine. All eight are available in milk, eggs, or meat, but no plant food contains all eight. A strict vegetarian runs a risk of protein malnutrition. An appropriate dietary mixture of plant foods, however, supplies all eight essential amino acids. In general, grains are complemented by legumes or by milk products; legumes are complemented by grains, seeds, and nuts. Long before the chemical basis for this complementarity was understood, societies with little access to meat developed healthy dietary practices. Many Central and South American peoples traditionally eat beans with corn, and the native peoples of North America complemented their beans with squash.
Why are dietary proteins completely digested to their constituent amino acids before being used by the body? Wouldn't it be more energy-efficient to reuse some dietary proteins directly? There are several reasons why ingested proteins are not used "as is." Macromolecules such as proteins are not readily taken up through plasma membranes, but their constituent monomers (such as amino acids) are readily transported. _rotein structure and function are highly species-specific. A protein that functions optimally in one species might not function well in another species. _oreign proteins entering the body directly from the gut would be recognized as invaders and would be attacked by the immune system.Most animals avoid these problems by digesting food proteins extracellularly and then absorbing the resulting amino acids into the body, where they synthesize new proteins that will function correctly and be recognized as "self" by the immune system. Using acetyl groups obtained from food, humans can synthesize almost all the lipids required by the body, but we must have a dietary source of essential fatty acids-notably linoleic acid. Linoleic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid needed by mammals to synthesize other unsaturated fatty acids such as arachidonic acid, which in turn produces several signaling molecules, including prostaglandins. A deficiency of linoleic acid can lead to problems such as infertility and impaired lactation. Essential fatty acids are also necessary components of membrane phospholipids.50.1.4 Animals need mineral elements in different amountsThe principal mineral elements required by animals are listed in Table 50.1. Elements required in large amounts are called macronutrients; elements required in only tiny amounts are called micronutrients. Some essential elements are required in such minute amounts that deficiencies are never observed, but these elements are nevertheless essential. Calcium is an example of a macronutrient. It is the fifth most abundant element in the body; a 70-kg person contains about 1,200 g of calcium. Calcium phosphate is the principal structural material in bones and teeth. Muscle contraction, neuronal function, and many other intracellular functions in animals require calcium. The turnover of calcium in the extracellular fluid is quite high, as bones are constantly being remodeled and calcium is constantly entering and leaving cells. Calcium is lost from the body in urine, sweat, and feces, so it must be replaced regularly from the diet. Humans require about 800 to 1,000 mg of calcium per day in the diet. Iron is an example of a micronutrient. Iron is found everywhere in the body because it is the oxygen-binding atom in hemoglobin and myoglobin and is a component of enzymes in the electron transport chain. Nevertheless, the total amount of iron in a 70-kg person is only about 4 g, and since iron is recycled so efficiently in the body and is not lost in the urine, we require only about 15 mg per day in ourfood. In spite of the small amount required, insufficient iron is the most common nutrient deficiency in the world today.50.1.5 Animals must obtain vitamins from food 891Another group of essential nutrients is the vitamins. Like essential amino acids and fatty acids, vitamins are carbon compounds that an animal requires for its normal growth and metabolism, but cannot synthesize for itself. Most vitamins function as coenzymes or parts of coenzymes and are required in very small amounts, compared with the essential amino acids and fatty acids, which have structural roles. The list of vitamins varies from species to species. Most mammals, for example, can make their own ascorbic acid (vitamin C). However, primates (including humans) do not have this ability, so for primates ascorbic acid is a vitamin. If we do not get vitamin C in ourfood, we develop a disease known as scurvy, characterized by bleeding gums, loss of teeth, subcutaneous hemorrhages, and slow wound healing. Scurvy was a serious and frequently fatal problem for sailors on long voyages until a Scottish physician, James Lind, discovered that the disease could be prevented if the sailors ate fresh greens or fresh fruit. Eventually the British Admiralty made limes standard provisions for its ships, and ever since British sailors have been called "limeys." The active ingredient in limes was named ascorbic ("without scurvy") acid.For humans, there are 13 vitamins. They are divided into two groups: water-soluble vitamins and fat-soluble vitamins. These vitamins, their dietary sources, and their functions.
The fat-soluble vitamin D (calciferol), which is essential for the absorption and metabolism of calcium, is a special case because the body can make it. Certain lipids present in the human body can be converted into vitamin D by the action of ultraviolet light on the skin. Thus vitamin D must be obtained in the diet only by individuals with inadequate exposure to the sun, such as people who live in cold climates where clothing usually covers most of the body and where the sun may not shine for long periods of time. The need for vitamin D may have been an important factor in the evolution of skin color. Human races that are adapted to equatorial and low latitudes have dark skin pigmentation as a protection against the damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation. These peoples generally have extensive skin areas exposed to the sun on a regular basis, so their skin synthesizes adequate amounts of vitamin D. Most human races that became adapted to higher latitudes lost dark skin pigmentation. Presumably, lighter skin facilitates vitamin D production in the relatively small areas of skin exposed to sunlight during the short days of winter. An exception to this correlation between latitude and skin pigmentation is the Inuit peoples of the Arctic. These dark-skinned people obtain plenty of vitamin D from the large amounts of meat and fish oils in their diet; for them, exposure to sunlight is not necessary for obtaining this vitamin. When water-soluble vitamins are ingested in excess of bodily needs, they are simply eliminated in the urine. (This is the fate of much of the vitamin C that people take in excessive doses.) The fat-soluble vitamins, however, accumulate in body fat and may build up to toxic levels in the liver if taken in excess.50.1.6 Nutrient deficiency diseasesA chronic shortage of any nutrient produces a characteristic deficiency disease. If the deficiency is not remedied, death may follow. An example is kwashiorkor, a disease that results from protein deficiency. It causes swelling of the extremities, distension of the abdomen, breakdown of the immune system, degeneration of the liver, mental retardation, and other problems. A shortage of any of the vitamins results in specific deficiency symptoms (see Table 50.2). We have already described scurvy, which results from a lack of vitamin C. Another deficiency disease, beriberi, was directly involved in the discovery of vitamins. Beriberi means "extreme weakness." It became prevalent in Asia in the nineteenth century, after it became standard practice to mill rice to a high, white polish and discard the hulls that are present in brown rice. A critical observation was that birds-chickens and pigeons-developed beriberi-like symptoms when fed only polished rice. In 1912, Casimir Funk cured pigeons of beriberi by feeding them the discarded hulls. At the time of Funk's discovery, all diseases were thought to be either caused by microorganisms or inherited. Funk suggested the radical idea that beriberi and some other diseases are dietary in origin and result from deficiencies in specific substances. Funk coined the term "vitamines" because he mistakenly thought that all these substances were amines (compounds with amino groups) vital for life. In 1926, thiamin (vitamin B1)-the substance lost in the rice milling process-was the first vitamin to be isolated in pure form. Deficiency diseases can also result from an inability to absorb or process an essential nutrient even if it is present in the diet. Vitamin B12 (cobalamin), for example, is present in all foods of animal origin. Since plants neither use nor produce vitamin B12, a strictly vegetarian diet (not supplemented by vitamin pills) can lead to a B12 deficiency disease called pernicious anemia, characterized by a failure of red blood cells to mature. The most common cause of pernicious anemia, however, is not a lack of vitamin B12 in the diet, but an inability to absorb it. Normally, cells in the stomach lining secrete a peptide called intrinsic factor, which binds to vitamin B12 and makes it possible for it to be absorbed in the ileum of the small intestine. Conditions that damage the stomach lining can therefore cause anemia. Inadequate mineral nutrition can also lead to deficiency diseases. Iodine, for example, is a constituent of the hormone thyroxine, which is produced in the thyroid gland. If insufficient iodine is obtained in the diet, the thyroid gland grows larger in an attempt to compensate for the inadequate production of thyroxine. The swelling of the neck that results is called a goiter. The introduction of iodized table salt has greatly reduced the incidence of goiter in the United States. 50.2 Adaptations for FeedingHeterotrophic organisms can be classified by how they acquire their nutrition. Saprobes (also called saprotrophs or decomposers) are mostly protists and fungi that absorb nutrients from dead organic matter. Detritivores, such as earthworms and crabs, actively feed on dead organic material. Animals that feed on living organisms are predators. Herbivores prey on plants, carnivores prey on animals, and omnivores prey on both. Filter feeders, such as clams and blue whales, prey on small organisms by filtering them from the environment. Fluid feeders include mosquitoes, aphids, and leeches, as well as birds that feed on plant nectar. The anatomical adaptations that enable a species to exploit a particular source of nutrition are usually quite obvious, but physiological and biochemical adaptations can be just as important.50.2.1 The food of herbivores is often low in energy and hard to digestVegetation is frequently coarse and difficult to break down physically, but herbivores must process large amounts of it, since its energy content is low. Most herbivores spend a great deal of their time feeding. Many have striking adaptations for feeding, such as the trunk (a flexible, gripping nose) of the elephant or the long neck of the giraffe. Many types of grinding, rasping, cutting, and shredding mouthparts have evolved in invertebrates for ingesting plant material, and the teeth of herbivorous vertebrates have been shaped by selection to process coarse plant matter. The digestive processes of herbivores can also be quite specialized. The Australian koala, for example, eats nothing but the leaves of eucalyptus trees. Eucalyptus leaves are tough, low in nutrient content, and loaded with pungent, toxic compounds that evolved to protect the trees from predators. Yet the koala's gut can digest and detoxify the leaves and absorb all the nutrients the animal needs from this highly specialized and formidable diet.50.2.2 Carnivores must detect, capture, and kill preyThe predatory behaviors of many carnivores are legendary. One need only call to mind the hunting skills of hawks, wolves, or any member of the cat family. Carnivores have evolved stealth, speed, power, large jaws, sharp teeth, and strong gripping appendages. Carnivores also have evolved remarkable means of detecting prey. Bats use echolocation, pit vipers sense infrared radiation from the warm bodies of their prey, and certain fishes detect electric fields created in the water by their prey (see Chapter 45). Adaptations for killing and ingesting prey are diverse and highly specialized. These adaptations can be especially important when the prey are capable of inflicting damage on the predator. A snake may strike with poisonous fangs, using its venom to immobilize its prey before ingesting it. To swallow large prey, a snake disengages its lower jaw from its joint with the skull 8a). The tentacles of jellyfishes, corals, squid, and octopuses, the long, sticky tongues of frogs and chameleons, and the webs of spiders are other fascinating examples of adaptations for capturing and immobilizing prey. Because some prey items are impossible to ingest, some predators digest their prey externally. Sea stars evert their stomachs (turn them inside out) and digest their molluscan prey while they are still in their shells 8b). Spiders usually prey on insects with indigestible exoskeletons. The spider injects its prey with digestive enzymes and then sucks out the liquefied contents, leaving behind the empty exoskeletons frequently seen in old spider webs.50.2.3 Vertebrate species have distinctive teethTeeth are adapted for the acquisition and initial processing of specific types of foods. Because they are one of the hardest structures of the body, an animal's teeth remain in the environment long after it dies. Paleontologists use teeth to identify animals that lived in the distant past and to deduce what their feeding behavior might have been.All mammalian teeth have a general structure consisting of three layers 9a). An extremely hard material called enamel, composed principally of calcium phosphate, covers the crown of the tooth. Both the crown and the root contain a layer of bony material called dentine, inside of which is a pulp cavity containing blood vessels, nerves, and the cells that produce the dentine. The shapes and organization of mammalian teeth, however, can be very different, since they are adapted to specific diets 9b). In general, incisors are used for cutting, chopping, or gnawing; canines are used for stabbing, ripping, and shredding; and molars and premolars (the cheek teeth) are used for shearing, crushing, and grinding. The highly varied diet of humans is reflected by our multipurpose set of teeth, as is common among omnivores. 50.3 DigestionMost animals digest their food extracellularly. Animals take food into a body cavity that is continuous with the outside environment, into which they secrete digestive enzymes. The enzymes act on the food, reducing it to nutrient molecules that can be absorbed by the cells lining the cavity. Only after they are absorbed by the cells are the nutrients within the body of the animal. The simplest digestive systems are gastrovascular cavities that connect to the outside world through a single opening. An example is the cnidarians, which capture prey using stinging nematocysts and cram it into their gastrovascular cavitues with tentacles. Enzymes in the gastrovascular cavity partly digest the prey. Cells lining the cavity take in small food particles by endocytosis. The vesicles that are created by endocytosis fuse with lysosomes containing digestive enzymes, and intracellular digestion completes the breakdown of the food. Nutrients are released to the cytoplasm as the vesicle breaks down.50.3.1 Tubular guts have an opening at each endThe guts of most animals are tubular. A mouth takes in food; molecules are digested and absorbed throughout the length of the gut; and solid digestive wastes are excreted through an anus. Different regions in the tubular gut are specialized for particular functions 10). These functions must be coordinated so that they occur in proper sequence and at appropriate rates to maximize the efficiency of digestion and absorption of nutrients. Keep in mind as we discuss these regions that all locations within the tubular gut are really outside the body of the animal. Only by crossing the plasma membranes of cells lining the gut do nutrients enter the body. At the anterior end of the gut are the mouth (the opening itself) and buccal cavity (mouth cavity). Food may be broken up by teeth (in some vertebrates), by the radula (in snails), or by mandibles (in insects), or somewhat farther along the gut by structures such as the gizzards of birds and earthworms, where muscular contractions of the gut grind the food together with small stones. Some animals, such as snakes, simply ingest large chunks of food, with little or no fragmentation.
Stomachs and crops are storage chambers that enable animals to ingest relatively large amounts of food and digest it at leisure. In these storage chambers, food may be further fragmented and mixed, but digestion may or may not occur there, depending on the species. In any case, food delivered into the next section of gut, the midgut or intestine, is well minced and well mixed. Most materials are digested and absorbed in the midgut. Specialized glands secrete some digestive enzymes into the intestine, and the gut wall itself secretes other digestive enzymes. The hindgut recovers water and ions and stores undigested wastes, or feces, so that they can be released to the environment at an appropriate time or place. A muscular rectum near the anus assists in the expulsion of feces, the process of defecation. Within the hindguts of many species are colonies of endosymbiotic bacteria. These bacteria obtain their own nutrition from the food passing through the host's gut while contributing to the digestive processes of the host. Members of the leech genus Hirudo, for example, produce no enzymes that can digest the proteins in the blood they suck from vertebrates. A colony of gut bacteria produces the enzymes necessary to break down those proteins into amino acids, which are subsequently used by both the leech and the bacteria. Some animals rely on microorganisms in their guts to supply them with vitamins. In many animals, the parts of the gut that absorb nutrients have evolved extensive surface areas 11a, b). In vertebrates, the wall of the gut is richly folded, with the individual folds bearing legions of tiny fingerlike projections called villi. The cells that line the surfaces of the villi, in turn, have microscopic projections, called microvilli. The microvilli present an enormous surface area for the absorption of nutrients.50.3.2 Digestive enzymes break down complex food moleculesProtein, carbohydrate, and fat macromolecules are broken down into their simplest monomeric units by hydrolytic enzymes. All of these enzymes cleave the chemical bonds of macromolecules through hydrolysis, a reaction that adds a water molecule. Examples of hydrolysis are the breaking of the bonds between adjacent amino acids of a protein or peptide and between adjacent glucose units of a starch. Digestive enzymes are classified according to the substances they hydrolyze: carbohydrases hydrolyze carbohydrates; proteases, proteins; peptidases, peptides; lipases, fats; and nucleases, nucleic acids. The prefixes exo- ("outside") and endo- ("within") indicate where the enzyme cleaves the molecule. An endoprotease hydrolyzes a protein at an internal site along the polypeptide chain, and an exoprotease snips away amino acids at the ends of the molecule. How can an organism produce enzymes that hydrolyze biological macromolecules without digesting itself? Most digestive enzymes are produced in an inactive form, known as a zymogen, so that they cannot act on the cells that produce them. When secreted into the gut, zymogens are activated by another enzyme or by conditions in the gut (which, as you will remember, is outside the body). The lining of the gut is not digested because it is protected by a covering of mucus. 50.4 Structure and Function of the Vertebrate GutThe digestive tract of vertebrates is a tubular gut that runs from mouth to anus. Different segments of the gut are specialized for different functions associated with digestion and absorption. In addition, there are several accessory structures that produce and export into the gut compounds that contribute to the digestive process.50.4.1 Similar tissue layers are found in all regions of the vertebrate gutThe cellular architecture of the vertebrate gut follows a common plan throughout. Four major layers of different cell types form the wall of the gut. These layers differ somewhat from compartment to compartment, but they are always present. Starting in the cavity, or lumen, of the gut, the first tissue layer is the mucosa. Mucosal cells have secretory and absorptive functions. Some secrete mucus, which lubricates and protects the walls of the gut. Others secrete digestive enzymes, and still others in the stomach secrete hydrochloric acid (HCl). In some regions of the gut, nutrients are absorbed across the plasma membranes of the mucosal cells; the plasma membranes of these absorptive cells have many folds that increase their surface area. At the base of the mucosa are some smooth muscle cells, and just outside the mucosa is the second layer of cells, the submucosa. Here we find the blood and lymph vessels that carry absorbed nutrients to the rest of the body. The submucosa also contains a network of nerves; these neurons are both sensory (responsible for stomach aches) and regulatory (controlling the various secretory functions of the gut). External to the submucosa are two layers of smooth muscle cells responsible for the movements of the gut. Innermost is the circular muscle layer with its cells oriented around the gut. Outermost is the longitudinal muscle layer with its cells oriented along the length of the gut. The circular muscles constrict the gut, and the longitudinal muscles shorten the gut. Between the two layers of muscle is a network of nerves that controls the movements of the gut, coordinating the movements of different regions with one another. Surrounding the gut is a fibrous coat called the serosa. Like other abdominal organs, the gut is also covered and supported by a tissue called the peritoneum.50.4.2 Peristalsis moves food through the gutFood entering the mouth of most vertebrates is chewed and mixed with the secretions of salivary glands. A muscular tongue then pushes chewed food toward the back of the buccal cavity. By making contact with the soft tissue at the back of the mouth, the bolus of food initiates a complex series of autonomic reflex actions known as swallowing. Stand in front of a mirror and gently touch this tissue at the back of your mouth with a cotton swab. You may gag slightly, but you will also experience an uncontrollable urge to swallow. Swallowing involves many muscles doing a variety of jobs that propel the food through the pharynx (where the mouth cavity and the nasal passages join) and into the esophagus (the food tube). A structure called the epiglottis prevents the food from entering the trachea (windpipe) or nasal passages. Once the food is in the esophagus, peristalsis takes over and pushes it toward the stomach. Peristalsis is a wave of smooth muscle contraction that moves progressively down the gut from the pharynx toward the anus. The smooth muscle of the gut contracts in response to being stretched. Swallowing a bolus of food stretches the upper end of the esophagus, and this stretching initiates a wave of contraction that slowly pushes the contents of the gut toward the anus. The movement of food from the stomach into the esophagus is normally prevented by a thick ring of circular smooth muscle at the junction of the esophagus and the stomach. This ring of muscle, the esophageal sphincter, is normally constricted. Waves of peristalsis cause it to relax enough to let food pass from the esophagus into the stomach. Sphincter muscles are found elsewhere in the digestive tract as well. The pyloric sphincter governs the passage of stomach contents into the intestine. Another important sphincter surrounds the anus.50.4.3 Digestion begins in the mouth and the stomachFood is chewed in the mouth, and carbohydrate digestion begins there. The enzyme amylase is secreted with saliva and mixed with the food as it is chewed. Amylase hydrolyzes the bonds between the glucose monomers that make up starch molecules. The action of amylase is what makes a piece of bread or cracker taste sweet if you hold it in your mouth long enough.Most vertebrates can rapidly consume a large volume of food, but digesting that food is a long, slow process. The stomach stores the food consumed during a meal. The secretions of the stomach kill microorganisms that are taken in with the food and begin the digestion of proteins. The major enzyme produced by the stomach is an endopeptidase called pepsin. Pepsin is secreted as a zymogen called pepsinogen by cells in the gastric glands-deep folds in the stomach lining. Other cells in the gastric glands produce hydrochloric acid, and still others near the openings of the gastric glands and throughout the stomach mucosa secrete mucus. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) maintains the stomach fluid (the gastric juice) at a pH between 1 and 3. This low pH activates the conversion of pepsinogen to pepsin, which is achieved by the cleavage of a masking sequence of 44 amino acids from the N-terminal end of the pepsinogen molecule. The conversion is amplified as the newly formed pepsin activates other pepsinogen molecules, a process called autocatalysis. Hydrochloric acid also provides the right pH for the enzymatic action of pepsin. The low pH also helps dissolve the intercellular substances holding the ingested tissues together. Breakdown of the ingested tissues exposes more food surface area to the action of pepsin and eventually other digestive enzymes in the small intestine.
Mucus secreted by the stomach mucosa coats the walls of the stomach and protects them from being eroded and digested by HCl and pepsin. Sometimes, however, the walls of the stomach are exposed to HCl and pepsin; the resulting damage is called an ulcer. It was previously thought that ulcers were mostly due to stress and oversecretion of digestive juices. In recent years, however, it has been discovered that the basis for most ulcers is an infectious bacterium called Helicobacter pylori, which has the remarkable ability to live in the highly acidic environment of the stomach. Lesions started by the bacterial infection are made worse by HCl and pepsin. Contractions of the muscles in the walls of the stomach churn its contents, thoroughly mixing them with the stomach secretions. The acidic, fluid mixture of gastric juice and partly digested food in the stomach is called chyme. A few substances can be absorbed from the chyme across the stomach wall, including alcohol (hence its rapid effects), aspirin, and caffeine, but even these substances are absorbed in rather small quantities in the stomach. Peristaltic contractions of the stomach walls push the chyme toward the bottom end of the stomach. These waves of peristalsis cause the pyloric sphincter to relax briefly so that little squirts of the chyme can enter the first region of the intestine. The human stomach empties itself gradually over a period of approximately 4 hours. This slow passage of food enables the intestine to work on a little material at a time and extends the digestive and absorptive processes throughout much of the time between meals.50.4.4 The small intestine is the major site of digestionIn the small intestine, the digestion of carbohydrates and proteins continues, and the digestion of fats begins and the absorption of nutrients begins. Although the small intestine takes its name from its diameter, it is a very large organ. The small intestine of an adult human is more than 6 m long; its coils fill much of the lower abdominal cavity. Because of its length, and because of the folds, villi, and microvilli of its lining, its inner surface area is enormous: about 550 m2, or roughly the size of a tennis court. Across this surface the small intestine absorbs all the nutrient molecules derived from food. The small intestine has three sections. The initial section-the duodenum-is the site of most digestion; the jejunum and the ileum carry out 90 percent of the absorption of nutrients. Digestion requires many specialized enzymes, as well as several other secretions. Two accessory organs that are not part of the digestive tract-the liver and the pancreas-provide many of these enzymes and secretions. The liver synthesizes a substance called bile from cholesterol. Bile secreted from the liver flows through the hepatic duct to the gallbladder and to theduodenum. Bile reaches the gallbladder through a side branch of the hepatic duct. It is stored in the gallbladder until it is needed to assist in fat digestion. When fat enters the duodenum, a hormonal signal causes the walls of the gallbladder to contract rhythmically, squeezing bile back out toward the hepatic duct. Below the branch point to the gallbladder, the hepatic duct is called the common bile duct. Bile from the gallbladder flows down the common bile duct to the duodenum. To understand the role of bile in fat digestion, think of the oil in salad dressing: it is not soluble in water (it is hydrophobic), and it tends to aggregate together in large globules. The enzymes that digest fat, the lipases, are water-soluble and must do their work in an aqueous medium. Bile stabilizes tiny droplets of fat so that they cannot aggregate into large globules. One end of each bile molecule is soluble in fat (it is lipophilic, or hydrophobic); the other end is soluble in water (it is hydrophilic, or lipophobic). Bile molecules bury their lipophilic ends in fat droplets, leaving their lipophobic ends sticking out. As a result, they prevent the fat droplets from sticking together. These very small fat particles are called micelles, and their small size maximizes the surface area exposed to lipase action.
The pancreas is a large gland that lies just beneath the stomach. It functions as both an endocrine (secreting hormones without ducts to the blood and tissue fluid) and an exocrine (secreting other substances through ducts to the outside of the body) gland. Here we will consider its exocrine products, which are delivered to the gut through the pancreatic duct. The pancreatic duct joins the common bile duct just before it enters the duodenum. The pancreas produces a host of digestive enzymes, including lipases. As in the stomach, these enzymes are released as zymogens; otherwise they would digest the pancreas and its ducts before they ever reached the duodenum. Once in the duodenum, one of these inactive enzymes, trypsinogen, is activated by enterokinase, which is produced by cells lining the duodenum. This process is similar to the activation of pepsinogen by low pH. Active trypsin can cleave other trypsinogen molecules to release even more active trypsin (another example of autocatalysis). Similarly, trypsin acts on the other zymogens secreted by the pancreas and releases their active enzymes. The mixture of zymogens produced by the pancreas can be very dangerous if the pancreatic duct is blocked or if the pancreas is injured by an infection or a severe blow to the abdomen. A few trypsinogen molecules spontaneously converting to trypsin can initiate a chain reaction of enzyme activation that digests the pancreas in a very short period of time, destroying both its endocrine and exocrine functions. The pancreas produces, in addition to digestive enzymes, a secretion rich in bicarbonate ions (HCO3-). Bicarbonate ions neutralize the pH of the chyme that enters the duodenum from the stomach. This neutralization is essential because intestinal enzymes function best at a neutral or slightly alkaline pH.50.4.5 Nutrients are absorbed in the small intestineOnly the smallest products of digestion can be absorbed through the mucosa of the small intestine and passed on to the blood and lymphatic vessels that lie in the submucosa. The final digestion of proteins and carbohydrates that produces these absorbable products takes place among the microvilli. The mucosal cells with microvilli produce peptidases, which cleave larger peptides into tripeptides, dipeptides, and individual amino acids that the cells can absorb. These cells also produce the enzymes maltase, lactase, and sucrase, which cleave the common disaccharides into their constituent, absorbable monosaccharides-glucose, galactose, and fructose.Many humans stop producing the enzyme lactase around the age of 4 years and thereafter have difficulty digesting lactose, which is the sugar in milk. Lactose is a disaccharide and cannot be absorbed without being cleaved into its constituent units, glucose and galactose. If a substantial amount of lactose remains unabsorbed and passes into the large intestine, its metabolism by bacteria in the large intestine causes abdominal cramps, gas, and diarrhea. The mechanisms by which the cells lining the intestine absorb nutrient molecules and inorganic ions are diverse and not completely understood. Many inorganic ions are actively transported into the cells. Carrier proteins exist for sodium, calcium, and iron. Carriers also exist for certain classes of amino acids and for glucose and galactose, but their activity is much reduced if active sodium transport is blocked.Sodium diffuses from the gut contents into the mucosal cells and is then actively transported from the mucosal cells into the submucosa. To diffuse into a mucosal cell, a sodium ion binds to a symport in the mucosal cell membrane. The symport also binds a nutrient molecule such as glucose or an amino acid. The diffusion of the sodium ion, driven by a concentrationgradient, therefore drives the absorption of the nutrient molecule. This mechanism is called sodium cotransport. The absorption of the products of fat digestion does not involve carrier proteins. Lipases break down fats into fatty acids and monoglycerides, which are lipid-soluble and are thus able to pass through the plasma membranes of the microvilli and diffuse into the mucosal cells. Once in the cells, the fatty acids and monoglycerides are resynthesized into triglycerides, combined with cholesterol and phospholipids, and coated with protein to form water-soluble chylomicrons, which are really little particles of fat. Rather than entering the blood directly, the chylomicrons pass into the lymphatic vessels in the submucosa. They then flow through the lymphatic system and enter the bloodstream through the thoracic duct. After a meal rich in fats, the chylomicrons can be so abundant in the blood that they give it a milky appearance.The bile that emulsifies the fats is not absorbed along with the monoglycerides and the fatty acids, but shuttles back and forth between the gut contents and the microvilli. In the ileum, bile is actively resorbed and returned to the liver via the bloodstream. As noted earlier, bile is synthesized in the liver from cholesterol. Cholesterol comes from food, but it is also synthesized by liver cells and gut cells. As we learned in Chapter 49, high cholesterol levels contribute to arterial plaque formation and therefore to cardiovascular disease. The body has no way of breaking down excess cholesterol, so high dietary intake or high levels of synthesis create problems. One major way that cholesterol leaves the body is through the elimination of unresorbed bile in the feces. The rationale for including certain kinds of fiber in the diet is that the fiber binds bile, decreases its resorption in the ileum, and thus helps to lower body cholesterol levels.50.4.6 Water and ions are absorbed in the large intestinePeristalsis gradually pushes the contents of the small intestine into the large intestine, or colon. The rate of peristalsis is controlled so that food passes through the small intestine slowly enough for digestion and absorption to be complete, but quickly enough to ensure an adequate supply of nutrients for the body. Most of the available nutrients have been removed from the material that enters the colon, but the material contains a lot of water and inorganic ions. The colon absorbs water and ions, producing semisolid feces from the slurry of indigestible materials it receives from the small intestine. Absorption of too much water in the colon can cause constipation. The opposite condition, diarrhea, results if too little water is absorbed or if water is secreted into the colon. (Both constipation and diarrhea can be induced by toxins from certain microorganisms.) Feces are stored in the last segment of the colon and are periodically excreted. Immense populations of bacteria live within the colon. One of the resident species is Escherichia coli, the bacterium that is so popular among researchers in biochemistry, genetics, and molecular biology. This inhabitant of the colon lives on matter indigestible to humans and produces some products useful to its host. Vitamin K and biotin, for example, are synthesized by E coli and absorbed across the wall of the colon. Excessive or prolonged intake of antibiotics can lead to vitamin deficiency because the antibiotics kill the normal intestinal bacteria at the same time they are killing the disease-causing organisms for which they are intended. The intestinal bacteria produce gases such as methane and hydrogen sulfide as by-products of their largely anaerobic metabolism. Humans expel gas after eating beans because the beans are rich in carbohydrates that bacteria-but not humans-can break down. The large intestine of humans has a small, fingerlike pouch called the appendix, which is best known for the trouble it causes when it becomes infected. The human appendix plays no essential role in digestion, but it does contribute to immune system function. It can be surgically removed without serious consequences. The part of the gut that forms the appendix in humans forms the much larger cecum in herbivores, where it functions, as we will see, in cellulose digestion. As our primate ancestors evolved to exploit diets less rich in indigestible cellulose, the cecum no longer served an essential function and gradually became vestigial (reduced to a trace).50.4.7 Herbivores have special adaptations to digest celluloseCellulose is the principal organic compound in the diets of herbivores. Most herbivores, however, cannot produce cellulases, the enzymes that hydrolyze cellulose. Exceptions include silverfish (well known for eating books and stored papers), earthworms, and shipworms. Other herbivores, from termites to cattle, rely on microorganisms living in their digestive tracts to digest cellulose for them.The digestive tracts of ruminants (cud chewers) such as cattle, goats, and sheep are specialized to maximize the benefits of their endosymbiotic microorganisms. In place of the usual mammalian stomach, ruminants have a large, four-chambered organ. The first two chambers, the rumen and the reticulum, are packed with anaerobic microorganisms that break down cellulose. The ruminant periodically regurgitates the contents of the rumen (the cud) into the mouth for rechewing. When the more thoroughly ground-up vegetable fibers are swallowed again, they present more surface area to the microorganisms for their digestive actions. The microorganisms in the rumen and reticulum metabolize cellulose and other nutrients to simple fatty acids, which become nutrients for the host. In addition, the microorganisms themselves provide an important source of protein for the host. The plant materials ingested by a ruminant are a poor source of protein, but they contain inorganic nitrogen that the microorganisms use to synthesize their own amino acids. A cow can derive more than 100 g of protein per day from digestion of its endosymbiotic microorganisms.Carbon dioxide and methane are by-products of the fermentation of cellulose carried out by microorganisms. A single cow can produce and belch 400 liters of methane a day. Methane is the second most abundant of the "greenhouse gases" whose concentration in the atmosphere is increasing, and domesticated ruminants are second only to industry as a source of methane emitted into the atmosphere. The food leaving the rumen carries with it enormous numbers of the cellulose-fermenting microorganisms. This mixture passes through the omasum, where it is concentrated by water absorption. It then enters the true stomach, the abomasum, which secretes hydrochloric acid and proteases. The microorganisms are killed by the acid, digested by the proteases, and passed on to the small intestine for further digestion and absorption. The rate of multiplication of microorganisms in the rumen is great enough to offset their loss, so a well-balanced, mutually beneficial relationship is maintained. Some mammalian herbivores other than ruminants have microbial farms and cellulose fermentation vats in a branch off the large intestine called the cecum. Rabbits and hares are good examples. Since the cecum empties into the large intestine, the absorption of the nutrients produced by the microorganisms is inefficient and incomplete. Therefore, some of these animals reingest some of their own feces, a behavior known as coprophagy. Coprophagous species usually produce two kinds of feces, one consisting of pure waste (which they discard), and one consisting mostly of cecal material, which they reingest directly from the anus. As this cecal material passes through the stomach and small intestine, the nutrients it contains are digested and absorbed. 50.5 Control and Regulation of DigestionThe vertebrate gut is an assembly line in reverse-a disassembly line. As with a standard assembly line, control and coordination of sequential processes is critical. Both neural and hormonal controls govern gut functions.50.5.1 Autonomic reflexes coordinate functions in different regions of the gutEveryone has experienced salivation stimulated by the sight or smell of food. That response is an autonomic reflex, as is the act of swallowing following tactile stimulation at the back of the mouth. Many autonomic reflexes coordinate activities in different regions of the digestive tract. Loading the stomach with food, for example, stimulates increased activity in the colon, which can lead to a bowel movement. The digestive tract is unusual in that it has an intrinsic (that is, its own) nervous system. In addition to autonomic reflexes involving theCNS, such as salivation and swallowing, neural messages can travel from one region of the digestive tract to another without being processed by the CNS.50.5.2 Hormones control many digestive functionsSeveral hormones control the activities of the digestive tract and its accessory organs. The first hormone ever discovered came from the duodenum; it was called secretin because it caused the pancreas to secrete digestive juices. We now know that secretin is one of several hormones that control pancreatic secretion; specifically, secretin stimulates the pancreas to secrete a solution rich in bicarbonate ions. In response to the presence of fats and proteins in the chyme, the mucosa of the small intestine secretes cholecystokinin, a hormone that stimulates the gallbladder to release bile and the pancreas to release digestive enzymes. Cholecystokinin and secretin also slow the movements of the stomach, which slows the delivery of chyme into the small intestine.The stomach secretes a hormone called gastrin into the blood. Cells in the lower region of the stomach release gastrin when they are stimulated by the presence of food. Gastrin circulates in the blood until it reaches cells in the upper areas of the stomach wall, where it stimulates the secretions and movements of the stomach. Gastrin release is inhibited when the stomach contents become too acidic-another example of negative feedback. 50.6 Control and Regulation of Fuel MetabolismMost animals do not eat continuously. When they do eat, food is present in the gut and nutrients are being absorbed for some period of time after the meal, called the absorptive period. Once the stomach and small intestine are empty, nutrients are no longer being absorbed. During this postabsorptive period, the continuous processes of energy metabolism and biosynthesis must run on internal reserves. Nutrient traffic must be controlled so that reserves accumulate during the absorptive period are used appropriately during the postabsorptive period.50.6.1 The liver directs the traffic of fuel moleculesThe liver directs the traffic of the nutrients that fuel metabolism. When nutrients are abundant in the blood, the liver stores them in the forms of glycogen and fats. The liver also synthesizes blood plasma proteins from circulating amino acids. When the availability of fuel molecules in the blood declines, the liver delivers glucose and fats back to the blood. The liver has an enormous capacity to interconvert fuel molecules. Liver cells can convert monosaccharides into either glycogen or fat, and vice versa. The liver can also convert certain amino acids and some other molecules, such as pyruvate and lactate, into glucose-a process called gluconeogenesis. The liver is also the major controller of fat metabolism through its production of lipoproteins.50.6.2 Lipoproteins: The good, the bad, and the uglyIn the intestine, bile solves the problem of processing hydrophobic fats in an aqueous medium. The transportation of fats in the circulatory system presents the same problem, and lipoproteins are the solution.A lipoprotein is a particle made up of a core of fat and cholesterol and a covering of protein that makes it water-soluble. The largest lipoprotein particles are the chylomicrons produced by the mucosal cells of the intestine, which transport dietary fat and cholesterol into the circulation. As the chylomicrons circulate through the liver and to adipose (fat) tissues throughout the body, receptors on the capillary walls recognize their protein coats, and lipases begin to hydrolyze the fats, which are then absorbed into liver or fat cells. Thus the protein coat of the lipoprotein both makes it water-soluble and serves as an "address" that directs it to a specific tissue. Lipoproteins other than chylomicrons originate in the liver and are classified according to their density. Fat has a low density (it floats in water), so the more fat a lipoprotein contains, the lower its density.  Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) produced by the liver contain mostly triglyceride fats that are being transported to fat cells in tissues around the body. Low-density lipoproteins (LDL) consist of about 50 to 60 percent cholesterol, which they transport to tissues around the body for use in biosynthesis and for storage. High-density lipoproteins (HDL) serve as acceptors of cholesterol (they consist of about 25 percent cholesterol) and are believed to remove cholesterol from tissues and carry it to the liver, where it can be used to synthesize bile. Because of their differing functions in cholesterol regulation, LDL is sometimes called "bad cholesterol" and HDL "good cholesterol"-designations that are somewhat controversial. However, we do know that a high ratio of LDL to HDL in a person's blood is a risk factor for atherosclerotic heart disease. Cigarette smoking lowers HDL levels, and regular exercise increases them.50.6.3 Fuel metabolism is controlled by hormonesDuring the absorptive period, blood glucose levels are high as carbohydrates are digested and absorbed. During this time, the liver takes up glucose from the blood and converts it to glycogen and fat, fat cells take up glucose from the blood and convert it to stored fat, and the cells of the body preferentially use glucose as their metabolic fuel. During the postabsorptive period these processes are reversed. The liver breaks down glycogen to supply glucose to the blood, the liver and the adipose tissues supply fatty acids to the blood, and most of the cells of the body preferentially use fatty acids as their metabolic fuel. One tissue that does not switch fuel sources during the postabsorptive period is the nervous system. The cells of the nervous system require a constant supply of glucose. Even though the nervous system can use other fuels to a limited extent, its overall dependence on glucose is the reason it is so important for other cells of the body to shift to fat metabolism during the postabsorptive period. This shift preserves the available glucose and glycogen stores for the nervous system for as long as possible. What directs the traffic in fuel molecules? Insulin and glucagon, two hormones produced and released by the pancreas, are responsible for controlling the metabolic directions that fuel molecules take. The most important of these hormones is insulin, which is produced in response to high blood glucose levels.
The pancreas releases insulin into the circulatory system when blood glucose rises above the normal postabsorptive level. Insulin facilitates the entry of glucose into most cells of the body. When insulin is present, most cells burn glucose as their metabolic fuel, fat cells use glucose to make fat, and liver cells convert glucose to glycogen and fat. As soon as blood glucose falls back to postabsorptive levels, insulin release diminishes rapidly, and the entry of glucose into cells other than those of the nervous system is inhibited. Without a supply of glucose, cells switch to using glycogen and fat as their metabolic fuels. In the absence of insulin, the liver and fat cells stop synthesizing glycogen and fat and begin breaking them down. As a result, the liver supplies glucose to the blood rather than taking it from the blood, and both the liver and the adipose tissues supply fatty acids to the blood. The pancreas releases glucagon when the blood glucose concentration falls below the normal postabsorptive level. Glucagon has the opposite effect of insulin: it stimulates liver cells to break down glycogen and to carry out gluconeogenesis. Thus, under the influence of glucagon, the liver produces glucose and releases it into the blood. The traffic of fuel molecules during the absorptive and postabsorptive periods indicates the steps controlled by insulin and glucagon. During the absorptive period, all fuel molecules move toward storage, and glucose is the preferred energy source for all cells. During the postabsorptive period, most cells switch to metabolizing fat so that blood glucose reserves are saved for the nervous system. The level of circulating glucose is maintained through glycogen breakdown and gluconeogenesis. 50.7 The Regulation of Food IntakeAt the beginning of this chapter we noted that obesity is a major health issue in the United States. People spend billions of dollars every year on schemes to lose weight, but the problem increases. A simple rule-take in fewer calories than your body burns, but maintain a balanced diet-should solve the problem, but it doesn't. Why? As we noted, social and lifestyle factors play a major role, but these factors play out against a genetic and regulatory background. The amount of food an animal eats is governed by its sensations of hunger and satiety, and these sensations are influenced by a region of the brain called the hypothalamus. If a region in the middle of the hypothalamus of rats, called the ventromedial hypothalamus, is damaged, the animals will increase their food intake and become obese. If a different region of the hypothalamus, called the lateral hypothalamus, is damaged, rats will decrease their food intake and become skinny. In both cases the rats eventually reach a new equilibrium body weight, which they maintain. Thus, regulation is maintained, but the level of regulation has been changed. Other brain regions have also been implicated in control of hunger and satiety. In Chapter 40 we learned that regulation involves feedback information and a means of comparing that information with a set point. There is some evidence that cells in the hypothalamus and in the liver are sensitive to the levels of blood glucose and insulin. with high levels stimulating satiety and low levels stimulating hunger. There is even stronger evidence, however, that signals from fat metabolism influence hunger and satiety.

A single-gene mutation in mice, when present in the homozygous condition, results in mice that eat enormous amounts of food and become obese. Using genetics terms, these mice are called ob/ob mice due to their double dose of the recessive "obese" gene. The wild-type ob gene codes for a protein that has been named leptin (from the Greek leptos, "thin"). When leptin was injected into ob/ob mice, they ate less and lost body fat. Leptin is produced by fat cells and circulates in the blood. Receptors for leptin are found in the regions of the hypothalamus that are involved in control of hunger and satiety. It seems that leptin signals the brain about the status of the body fat reserves. Could leptin be used to reduce human obesity? In a very few cases, obese humans do not produce the hormone leptin, and injections of leptin can curb their appetites and enable them to lose body mass. Most obese humans, however, have higher than normal circulating levels of leptin. It is likely that they have receptors with reduced sensitivity. Leptin appears to be one important feedback signal in the regulation of food intake. Understanding the actions of leptin in normal and obese individuals might provide a partial answer as to why some individuals find it easier than others to avoid excessive food intake and increases in body fat. Additional feedback signals are most certainly involved. 50.8 Toxic Compounds in FoodPlant and animal tissues contain nutrients, but as we have seen, they can also contain toxic compounds. Some mushrooms, for example, contain poisons and hallucinogens; some mollusks, fishes, and amphibians contain neurotoxins; some plants contain compounds that stimulate or depress the heart; and of course, tobacco contains nicotine, poppies contain opium, and marijuana contains tetrahydrocannabinol. Ingesting many plant and animal tissues, therefore, can be dangerous.Human activities add millions of tons of synthetic toxic compounds to our environment every year, making the problem worse. Many of these compounds enter the air we breathe andthe water we drink, as well as the food we eat. A whole new field, called environmental toxicology, has developed to address the problems of poisons in the environment.50.8.1 Some toxins are retained and concentrated in organismsThe physical and chemical properties of a toxic compound affect its retention within a biological system. If a compound can dissolve in water, it may be quickly metabolized (and thus detoxified) because it is easily accessible to the wide variety of enzymes that can break down complex molecules in food.In addition to being broken down or metabolized, many water-soluble compounds can be filtered out of the blood by the kidneys, and therefore do not accumulate in the body. That is why urine tests are used to detect illegal drug use by athletes and other individuals. However, some potentially dangerous water-soluble compounds can be incorporated into the body and disrupt normal functions. An example is lead, which can replace iron in blood and calcium in bone. Lipid-soluble compounds are usually metabolized more slowly than water-soluble compounds, and they are often stored in the body for a long time because they dissolve in the lipids of membranes and adipose tissues. Lipid-soluble compounds can accumulate in the body and reach very high concentrations. Even compounds that are beneficial or neutral to the body at low concentrations, such as fat-soluble vitamins, can become toxic at high concentrations.50.8.2 Some toxins can bioaccumulate in the environmentSome lipid-soluble toxins, including many pesticides, can bioaccumulate in the environment; that is, they can become more and more concentrated in predators that eat contaminated prey. The pesticide load is passed up the food chain from prey to predator, growing increasingly concentrated in the tissues of each consumer in turn. In the top predator, the pesticide may be concentrated thousands or millions of times. Many top predators show high levels of pesticides and other synthetic chemicals in their tissues. Long-lived species, such as eagles or bears, are particularly at risk for heavy body burdens of accumulated pesticides because they have many years to accumulate them. Bioaccumulated toxins may be responsible for high rates of cancer and infertility in some wildlife populations.A well-documented case was the effect of the pesticide DDT on predatory bird populations. Bioaccumulated DDT caused extreme thinning of eggshells and therefore high mortality of embryos. As a result, many species of predatory birds, such as ospreys, eagles, and falcons, became endangered. Since the banning of DDT use in the United States, these species have been recovering. Scientists and policymakers are now setting standards for and researching alternatives to such pesticides to decrease the amounts of synthetic toxins bioaccumulating within natural systems. Since humans are at the top of the food chain, eating at all levels, we must consider the risks of our own exposure to these toxins.50.8.3 The body cannot metabolize many synthetic toxinsHow does the way that the body handles synthetic chemicals differ from the way it handles natural chemicals? In many cases, the detoxification systems that metabolize natural chemicals can also metabolize synthetic chemicals, breaking them apart and eliminating them through the urine. Enzymes called cytochrome P450s are responsible for much of this detoxification. P450s are less specific in their abilities to bind substrates than are most enzymes. Thus, each P450 can catalyze reactions with a wide range of compounds, and there are many P450s. Phase I P450s make small chemical changes to the substrate, such as adding a ;sbOH group or a ;sbSO3 group, which prepares the substrate for a second reaction. Phase II P450s use the ;sbOH or ;sbSO3 group to attach a hydrophilic group onto the substrate, which facilitates the elimination of that substrate from the body. Few natural compounds can escape the P450s, even when the body encounters them for the first time.Some synthetic chemicals, however, fall outside the range of structures that P450s and other enzymes can metabolize. When such chemicals are lipophilic, they bioaccumulate, and any biological effect they have is greatly magnified. If a synthetic chemical that cannot be metabolized is structurally similar to a hormone, that synthetic chemical may activate the hormonal signaling pathway within target cells. Whereas the natural hormonal signal can be turned off, the synthetic hormone cannot be, and control of function is lost. One example of a class of synthetic chemicals that appear to mimic hormones in animals is the polychlorinated biphenyls, PCBs. PCBs were produced extensively for use as an insulating fluid in electrical transformers from the 1930s until recently. PCBs are chemically stable, lipophilic, and are now found throughout the environment. They have been shown to bioaccumulate, reaching dangerously high levels in fish from contaminated waters such as the Great Lakes.The biological response to exposure to PCBs in the diet varies among species. In rhesus monkeys, PCBs altered reproductive cycles, reduced weight gain in infants, depressed immune system responsiveness, and increased the incidence of death in developing embryos. In communities around the Great Lakes, studies have indicated cognitive impairment in children of mothers with a high body burden of PCBs, probably from eating fish caught in the Great Lakes. Studies of animals and of humans that have been exposed accidentally to high levels of PCBs have shown that effects are slow to reverse, lasting from several months to a year. The risks of PCBs and DDT are now clear, but it is usually difficult to make a causal connection between a toxin in the environment and specific health effects in a population. Environmental toxicologists must be able to study large populations, use powerful statistics, and do controlled laboratory studies to obtain evidence that will support policy changes to stop and reverse the effects of synthetic environmental toxins.51 Salt and Water Balance and ExcretionBlood, sweat, and tears taste salty because they reflect the composition of the tissue fluid that bathes the cells of the body. The volume and the concentration of the tissue fluid must remain within certain limits and must be kept relatively free of wastes. Maintaining homeostasis of the tissue fluid can be challenging. Consider the problems of vampires-not the horror film kind, but the bat kind. Vampire bats are small mammals that feed on the blood of other mammals, such as cattle. The bat lands on an unsuspecting (usually sleeping) victim, bites into a vein, and drinks blood-a high-protein, liquid food. The bat has only a short time to feed before the victim wakes and shakes it off. To maximize the volume of blood it can ingest, it eliminates water from its food as fast as it can by producing a lot of very dilute urine. The warm trickle down the neck of the victim is not blood!Once feeding ends, however, this high rate of water loss cannot continue. Now the vampire bat is digesting protein and must excrete large amounts of nitrogenous breakdown products while conserving its body water. Within minutes, the excretory system of the vampire bat switches from producing lots of very dilute urine to producing a tiny amount of highly concentrated urine. Within minutes, the vampire bat is able to switch from an excretory physiology typical of an animal living in fresh water to an excretory physiology typical of an animal living in an arid desert.In this chapter we discover how the vampire bat and other species accomplish the various feats of salt and water balance and excretion of wastes that adapt them to many different environments. We begin by discussing the challenges presented by different environments; we use some invertebrate examples to illustrate the basic mechanisms used in the excretory systems of all animals. Turning to vertebrates, we show that the common anatomical unit that accomplishes all of these tasks is the nephron. The nephron evolved from a structure that enabled animals living in fresh water to excrete water to a structure that enabled animals living in dry terrestrial habitats to conserve water. Finally, we present the mechanisms that control and regulate salt and water balance in mammals, giving the vampire bat and other species their remarkable abilities to exploit unusual diets and extreme environments.51.1 Tissue Fluids and Water Balance 910Life evolved in the seas, and seawater is the extracellular environment for the cells of the simplest marine animals. More complex marine animals have an internal environment consisting of extracellular or tissue fluid, which is isolated from seawater but is similar to it in composition and osmotic concentration. Marine vertebrates and terrestrial animals maintain tissue fluids whose concentration and composition differ considerably from that of seawater (see Chapter 49). The concentration of the tissue fluid determines the water balance of the cells, and its composition influences the health and functions of the cells. Recall, for example, the importance of ionic gradients between the tissue fluid and the cytoplasm of nerve and muscle cells (see chapters 44-48). To understand what is meant by water balance, recall that cell plasma membranes are permeable to water and that the movement of water across membranes depends on differences in solute potential. (You may find it useful to review the discussion of osmosis in Chapter 5.) If the solute potential of the tissue fluid is less negative (that is, the fluid contains fewer solutes) than that of the intracellular fluids, water moves into the cells, causing them to swell and possibly burst. If the solute potential of the tissue fluid is more negative (the fluid contains more solutes) than that of the intracellular fluids, the cells lose water and shrink. The solute potential of tissue fluid determines both the volume and the solute potential of the intracellular environment.51.1.1 Excretory organs control the solute potential of tissue fluid 911Excretory organs control the solute potential and the volume of tissue fluid by excreting solutes that are in excess (such as NaCl when we eat lots of salty food) and conserving solutes that are valuable or in short supply (such as glucose and amino acids). In terrestrial organisms, these excretory organs also eliminate the waste products of nitrogen metabolism. The output of the excretory organs is called urine. The functions of the excretory organs of a species, and therefore the composition of its urine, depend on the environment in which it lives. We will examine excretory systems that maintain salt and water balance and eliminate nitrogen in marine, freshwater, and terrestrial habitats. In spite of the evolutionary diversity of the anatomical and physiological details, all these systems obey a common rule: there is no active transport of water. Water must be moved either by pressure or by a difference in solute potential. Also, in spite of this evolutionary diversity, there are common mechanisms used by excretory systems.51.1.2 Mechanisms used by excretory systems include filtration, secretion, and resorption 911The excretory systems of many species filter the tissue fluid and then process the filtrate through a system of tubules to produce urine. This filtration process is usually carried out on blood plasma driven across capillary walls in the excretory organ by blood pressure. The filtrate then enters a system of tubules. The cells of the tubules change the composition of the filtrate by active secretion and resorption of specific solute molecules. These three mechanisms are used in the excretory systems of freshwater species, which excrete water and conserve salts, as well as in the systems of marine and terrestrial species, which conserve water and excrete salts. 51.2 Distinguishing Environments and Animals in Terms of Salt and Water 911The salt concentration, or osmolarity, of ocean water is about 1,070 milliosmoles/liter (mosm/l), and fresh water is generally between 1 and 10 mosm/l. Aquatic environments grade continuously from fresh to extremely salty. Consider a place where a river enters the sea through a bay or a marsh. Aquatic environments within that bay or marsh range in osmolarity from that of the fresh water of the river to that of the open sea. Evaporating tide pools can reach an even greater osmolarity than seawater. Animals live in all these environments. Some species, called osmoconformers, allow the osmolarity of their tissue fluids to equilibrate with their environment. Others, called osmoregulators, maintain the osmolarity of their tissue fluids at a constant level as the environment changes.51.2.1 Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers 911Over a wide range of environmental osmolarities, marine invertebrates simply equilibrate the osmolarity of their tissue fluid with that of the environment. There are limits to osmoconformity, however. No animal could survive if its tissue fluid had the osmolarity of fresh water; nor could animals survive with internal osmolarities as high as those that may be reached in an evaporating tide pool. Such solute concentrations cause proteins to denature.51.2.2 Osmoregulators regulate the concentration of their tissue fluids 911All animals have some solutes in their tissue fluids. Therefore, in fresh water, osmosis will cause water to invade the bodies of animals, so osmoregulation is essential. To osmoregulate in fresh water, animals must excrete water and conserve solutes; hence they produce large amounts of dilute urine. In salt water, the opposite problem exists. For animals that maintain the osmolarity of their tissue fluids below that of the environment, osmosis will cause a loss of water. To osmoregulate in salt water, animals must conserve water and excrete salts; thus they tend to produce small amounts of very concentrated urine.Even animals that osmoconform over a wide range of environmental osmolarities must osmoregulate in extreme environments. An excellent example is the brine shrimp Artemia, which lives in environments of almost any salinity. Artemia are found in huge numbers in the most saline environmentsknown, such as Great Salt Lake in Utah or coastal evaporation ponds where salt is concentrated for commercial purposes. The osmolarity of such water reaches 2,500 mosm/l. At these high environmental osmolarities, Artemia is capable of maintaining its tissue fluid osmolarity considerably below that of the environment, and therefore acts as a hypotonic osmoregulator. Very few organisms can survive in the crystallizing brine in which Artemia thrives. The main mechanism this small crustacean uses for hypotonic osmoregulation is the active transport of NaCl from its tissue fluids out across its gill membranes to the environment. Artemia cannot survive in fresh water, but they can live in dilute seawater, in which they maintain the osmolarity of their tissue fluids above that of the environment. Under these conditions, Artemia behaves as a hypertonic osmoregulator; that is, it maintains the osmolarity of its tissue fluid above the osmolarity of the environment.51.2.3 The composition of tissue fluids can be regulated 912Osmoconformers can be ionic conformers, allowing the ionic composition, as well as the osmolarity, of their tissue fluids to match that of the environment. Most osmoconformers, however, are ionic regulators to some degree: They employ active transport mechanisms to maintain specific ions in their tissue fluid at concentrations different from those in the environment. The terrestrial environment presents problems of salt and water balance that are entirely different from those faced by aquatic organisms. Because the terrestrial environment is extremely desiccating (drying), most terrestrial animals must conserve water. (Exceptions are animals such as muskrats and beavers that spend most of their time in water.) Terrestrial animals obtain their salts from their food. But plants generally have low concentrations of sodium, so most herbivores must conserve sodium ions. Some terrestrial herbivores travel long distances to naturally occurring salt licks. By contrast, birds that feed on marine animals must excrete the large excess of sodium they ingest with their food. Their nasal salt glands excrete a concentrated solution of sodium chloride via a duct that empties into the nasal cavity. Birds, such as penguins and seagulls, that have nasal salt glands can be seen frequently sneezing or shaking their heads to get rid of the very salty droplets that form. 51.3 Excreting Nitrogen 912The end products of the metabolism of carbohydrates and fats are water and carbon dioxide, which are not difficult to eliminate. Proteins and nucleic acids, however, contain nitrogen, so their metabolism produces nitrogenous wastes in addition to water and carbon dioxide. The most common nitrogenous waste is ammonia (NH3), which is highly toxic. Ammonia must be excreted continuously to prevent its accumulation, or it must be detoxified by conversion into other molecules for excretion. Those molecules are principally urea and uric acid.51.3.1 Aquatic animals excrete ammonia 912Continuous excretion of ammonia is relatively simple for aquatic animals. Ammonia diffuses in and is highly soluble in water. Animals that breathe water continuously lose ammonia from their blood to the environment by diffusion across their gill membranes. Animals, such as aquatic invertebrates and bony fishes, that excrete ammonia are said to be ammonotelic.51.3.2 Many terrestrial animals and some fishes excrete urea 912Ammonia is a dangerous metabolite for terrestrial animals that have limited access to water. In mammals, ammonia is lethal when it reaches only 5 mg/100 ml of blood. Therefore, terrestrial (and some aquatic) animals convert ammonia into either urea or uric acid. Ureotelic animals, such as mammals, amphibians, and cartilaginous fishes (sharks and rays), excrete urea as their principal nitrogenous waste product. Urea is quite soluble in water, but excretion of urea solutions at low concentrations could result in a large loss of water that many terrestrial animals can ill afford. As we will see later in this chapter, mammals have evolved excretory systems that can conserve water by producing concentrated urea solutions. The cartilaginous fishes are another story. These marine species keep their body fluids almost isotonic to the marine environment by retaining high concentrations of urea.51.3.3 Some terrestrial animals excrete uric acid 912Animals that conserve water by excreting nitrogenous wastes as uric acid are said to be uricotelic. Insects, reptiles, birds, and some amphibians are uricotelic. Uric acid is very insoluble in water and is excreted as a semisolid (for example, the whitish material in bird droppings). Therefore, a uricotelic animal loses very little water as it disposes of its nitrogenous wastes.51.3.4 Most species produce more than one nitrogenous waste 913Humans are ureotelic, yet we also excrete uric acid and ammonia. The uric acid in human urine comes largely from the metabolism of nucleic acids and caffeine. In the condition known as gout, uric acid levels in the tissue fluid increase and uric acid precipitates in the joints and elsewhere, causing swelling and pain. The excretion of ammonia is an important mechanism for regulating the pH of the tissue fluid. In some species, different developmental forms live in quite different habitats and have different forms of nitrogen excretion. The tadpoles of frogs and toads, for example, excrete ammonia across their gill membranes, but when they develop into adult frogs or toads, they generally excrete urea. Some adult frogs and toads that live in arid habitats excrete uric acid. These examples show the considerable evolutionary flexibility in how nitrogenous wastes are excreted. 51.4 The Diverse Excretory Systems of Invertebrates 914Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers and have few adaptations for salt and water balance other than active transportmechanisms for ionic regulation. To excrete nitrogen, they can passively lose ammonia by diffusion to the seawater. Freshwater and terrestrial invertebrates, however, have a wide variety of adaptations for maintaining salt and water balance and excreting nitrogen. All of these adaptations are based on the same set of mechanisms: filtration of body fluids and active secretion and resorption of specific ions.51.4.1 Protonephridia excrete water and conserve salts 914Many flatworms, such as Planaria, live in fresh water. These animals excrete water through an elaborate network of tubules running throughout their bodies. The tubules end in flame cells, so called because each tubule has a tuft of cilia beating inside it, giving the appearance of a flickering flame. A flame cell and a tubule together form a protonephridium (plural protonephridia; from the Greek proto, "before," and nephros, "kidney"). Tissue fluid enters the tubules (how it does so is not entirely clear), and the beating of the cilia causes this fluid to flow through the tubules toward the animal's excretory pore. As it flows, the cells of the tubules modify the fluid. As the modified tubule fluid (urine) leaves the planarian, it is less concentrated than the animal's tissue fluid, so ions are conserved and water is excreted by the protonephridium.51.4.2 Metanephridia process coelomic fluid 914Filtration of body fluids and modification of urine by tubules are highly developed processes in annelid worms, such as the earthworm. Recall that annelids are segmented and have a fluid-filled body cavity, called a coelom, in each segment. Annelids have a closed circulatory system through which blood is pumped under pressure. The pressure causes the blood to be filtered across the thin, permeable capillary walls into the coelom. This process is called filtration because the cells and large protein molecules of the blood stay behind in the capillaries while water and small molecules leave them and enter the coelom. In addition, some waste products, such as ammonia, diffuse directly from the tissues into the coelom. But where does this coelomic fluid go? Each segment of the earthworm contains a pair of metanephridia (singular metanephridium; from the Greek meta, akin to, and nephros, kidney). Each metanephridium begins in one segment as a ciliated, funnel-like opening in the coelom called a nephrostome, which leads into a tubule in the next segment. The tubule ends in a pore called the nephridiopore, which opens to the outside of the animal. Coelomic fluid enters the metanephridia through the nephrostomes. As the fluid passes through the tubules, the cells of the tubules actively resorb certain molecules from it and actively secrete other molecules into it. What leaves the animal through the nephridiopores is a hypotonic (dilute) urine containing nitrogenous wastes, among other solutes.51.4.3 Malpighian tubules are the excretory organs of insects 914Insects can excrete nitrogenous wastes with very little loss of water. Therefore, some species can live in the driest habitats on Earth. The insect excretory system consists of blind tubules called Malpighian tubules. An individual insect has from 2 to more than 100 of these tubules attached to the gut between the midgut and hindgut and projecting into the spaces containing tissue fluid (recall that insects have open circulatory systems). The cells of the Malpighian tubules actively transport uric acid, potassium ions, and sodium ions from tissue fluid into the tubules. As these solutes are secreted into the tubules, water follows because of the difference in solute potential. The walls of the Malpighian tubules have muscle fibers that contract to help move the contents of the tubules toward the hindgut. The tubule fluid changes in composition while it is in the hindgut. The contents of the hindgut are more acidic than the tubule fluid; as a result, uric acid becomes less soluble and precipitates out of solution as it approaches and enters the rectum. The epithelial cells of the hindgut and rectum actively transport sodium and potassium ions from the gut contents back into the tissue fluid. Because the uric acid molecules have precipitated out of solution, water is free to follow the resorbed salts back into the tissue fluid through osmosis. Remaining in the rectum are crystals of uric acid mixed with undigested food; this dry matter is what the insect eliminates. The Malpighian tubule system is a highly effective mechanism for excreting nitrogenous wastes and some salts without giving up a significant fraction of the animal's precious water supply. 51.5 Vertebrate Excretory Systems Are Built of Nephrons 915The major excretory organ of vertebrates is the kidney. The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron. Each human kidney has about a million nephrons. All vertebrate kidneys consist of nephrons, yet the kidneys of different species can serve opposite functions to maintain water and salt balance. The kidneys of freshwater fishes, for example, excrete water, but the kidneys of most mammals conserve water. To understand how the kidney can fulfill opposite functions in different animals, we need to understand how the different parts of the nephron work and the different ways in which they can work together to influence the composition of the urine. The nephron has three main parts: ball of capillaries called the glomerulus; set of renal tubules that modify the tissue fluid; system of peritubular capillaries that serves the tubules.51.5.1 Blood is filtered in the glomerulus 916Each nephron has both vascular and tubule components. The vascular component is unusual in that it consists of two capillary beds that lie between the arteriole that supplies it and the venule that drains it. The first capillary bed is a dense knot of very permeable vessels called the glomerulus (plural glomeruli). Blood enters the glomerulus through an afferent arteriole and exits through an efferent arteriole. The efferent arteriole gives rise to the second set of capillaries, the peritubular capillaries, which surround the tubule component of the nephron. The tubule component of the nephron, called a renal tubule, begins with Bowman's capsule, which encloses the glomerulus. The glomerulus appears to be pushed into Bowman's capsule much like a fist pushed into an inflated balloon. Together, the glomerulus and its surrounding Bowman's capsule are called the renal corpuscle. The cells of the capsule that come into direct contact with the glomerular capillaries are called podocytes. These highly specialized cells have numerous armlike extensions, each with hundreds of fine, fingerlike projections. The podocytes wrap around the capillaries so that their fingerlike projections interdigitate and cover the capillaries completely.The glomerulus filters the blood to produce a tubule fluid that lacks cells and large molecules. The walls of the capillaries, the basal lamina of the capillary endothelium, and the podocytes of Bowman's capsule all participate in filtration. The endothelial walls of the capillaries have pores that allow water and small molecules to leave, but are too small to permit red blood cells to pass through. The meshwork of the basal lamina is even finer than the pores between the endothelial cells, and it prevents large molecules from leaving the capillaries. Also smaller than the pores in the capillaries are the narrow slits between the fingerlike projections of the podocytes. As a result of these anatomical adaptations, water and small molecules pass from the capillary blood and enter the renal tubule of the nephron, but red blood cells and proteins remain in the capillaries. The force that drives filtration in the glomerulus is the pressure of the arterial blood. As in every other capillary bed, the pressure of the blood entering the permeable capillaries causes the filtration of water and small molecules. The glomerular filtration rate is high because glomerular capillary blood pressure is unusually high, and because the capillaries of the glomerulus, along with their covering of podocytes, are much more permeable than other capillary beds in the body.51.5.2 The renal tubules convert glomerular filtrate to urine 916The composition of the filtrate that enters the nephron is similar to that of the blood plasma. This filtrate contains glucose, amino acids, ions, and nitrogenous wastes in the same concentrations as in the blood plasma, but it lacks the plasma proteins. As this fluid passes down the renal tubule, its composition changes as the cells of the tubule actively resorb certain molecules from the tubule fluid and secrete other molecules into it. When the tubule fluid leaves the kidney as urine, its composition is very different from that of the original filtrate. The function of the renal tubules is to control the composition of the urine by actively secreting and resorbing specific molecules. The peritubular capillaries serve the needs of the renal tubules by bringing to them the molecules to be secreted into the tubules and carrying away the molecules that are resorbed from the tubules.51.5.3 Both marine and terrestrial vertebrates must conserve water 917Since the vertebrate nephron evolved as a structure for excreting water while conserving salts and essential small molecules, how have vertebrates adapted to environments where water must be conserved and salts excreted? The answer to this question differs for each vertebrate group. Even among the marine fishes, the adaptations of bony fishes are different from those of cartilaginous fishes. Marine bony fishes cannot produce urine more concentrated than their tissue fluid, but unlike most marine animals, they osmoregulate their tissue fluid to only one-fourth to one-third the solute potential of seawater. They prevent excessive loss of water by producing very little urine. Their urine production is low because their kidneys have fewer glomeruli than do the kidneys of freshwater fishes. In some species of marine bony fishes, the kidneys have no glomeruli at all. Even though the glomeruli are reduced or absent, renal tubules with closed ends are retained for active excretion of ions and certain molecules. Marine bony fishes take in seawater with their food, which results in a large salt load. The fish handle these salt loads by simply not absorbing some ions (such as Mg2+ or SO42-) from their guts and by actively excreting others (such as Na+ and Cl-) from the gill membranes and from the renal tubules. Nitrogenous wastes are lost as ammonia from the gill membranes. Cartilaginous fishes are osmoconformers, but not ionic conformers. Unlike marine bony fishes, cartilaginous fishes convert nitrogenous wastes to urea and another compound called tri-methyl amine oxide and retain large amounts of these compounds in their tissue fluids. As a result, their tissue fluids have an osmolarity close to that of seawater. These species have adapted to a concentration of urea in the body fluids that would be fatal to other vertebrates. Sharks and rays still have the problem of excreting the large amounts of salts they take in with their food. They have several sites of active secretion of NaCl, but the major one is a salt-secreting rectal gland.Most amphibians live in or near fresh water and stay in humid habitats when they venture from the water. Like freshwater fishes, most amphibian species produce large amounts of dilute urine and conserve salts. Some amphibians, however, have adapted to habitats that require water conservation. Amphibians living in very dry terrestrial environments have reduced the water permeability of their skin. Some secrete a waxy substance that they spread over the skin to waterproof it. Several species of frogs that live in arid regions of Australia burrow deep into the ground, where they remain during long dry periods. There they enter estivation, a state of very low metabolic activity and therefore low water turnover. When it rains, these frogs come out of estivation, feed, and reproduce. But their most interesting adaptation is that they have enormous urinary bladders. Before entering estivation, they fill their bladders with dilute urine, which can amount to one-third of their body weight. This dilute urine serves as a water reservoir that they use gradually during the long period of estivation. Australian aboriginal peoples dig up estivating frogs as an emergency source of drinking water. Reptiles occupy habitats ranging from aquatic to extremely hot and dry. Three major adaptations have freed the reptiles from maintaining the close association with water that is necessary for most amphibians. First, reptiles do not need fresh water to reproduce, because they employ internal fertilization and lay eggs with shells that retard evaporative water loss. Second, they have scaly, dry skins that retard evaporative water loss. Third, they excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric acid solids, therefore losing little water in the process. Birds have the same adaptations for water conservation that reptiles have: internal fertilization, shelled eggs, skin that retards water loss, and uric acid as the nitrogenous waste product. In addition, some birds can produce a urine that is more concentrated than their tissue fluids. This last ability is most developed in mammals. 51.6 The Mammalian Excretory System 918The adaptations of mammals and birds for producing urine hypertonic to their tissue fluids were an important step in vertebrate evolution. These adaptations enabled the excretory system to conserve water while still excreting excess salts and nitrogenous wastes. Mammals and birds have high body temperatures and high metabolic rates, and therefore have the potential for a high rate of water loss. Being able to minimize water loss from their excretory systems made it possible for these highly active species to occupy arid habitats. We have seen how the nephron originally evolved to excrete water; now we will see how it can serve as the basic structural unit of an organ that is able to conserve water. To understand this evolutionary change of function, it is necessary to understand the structure and function of the nephron in the context of the overall anatomy of the kidney. First, however, let's look at the mammalian excretory system as a whole.51.6.1 Kidneys produce urine, which the bladder stores 918We will use humans here as our example of the mammalian excretory system. Humans have two kidneys just under the dorsal wall of the abdominal cavity in the mid-back region. Each kidney filters blood, processes the filtrate into urine, and releases that urine into a duct called the ureter. The ureter of each kidney leads to the urinary bladder, where the urine is stored until it is excreted through the urethra. The urethra is a short tube that opens to the outside at the end of the penis in males or just anterior to the vaginal opening in females. Two sphincter muscles surrounding the base of the urethra control the timing of urination. One of these sphincters is a smooth muscle and is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. When the bladder is full, a spinal reflex relaxes this sphincter. This reflex is the only control of urination in infants, but the reflex gradually comes under the influence of higher centers in the nervous system as a child grows older. The other sphincter is a skeletal muscle and is controlled by the voluntary, or conscious, nervous system. When the bladder is very full, only serious concentration prevents urination.51.6.2 Nephrons have a regular arrangement in the kidney 919The kidney is shaped like a kidney bean; when cut down its long axis and split open as a bean splits open, its important anatomical features are revealed. The ureter and the renal artery and renal vein enter the kidney on its concave (punched-in) side. The ureter divides into several branches, the ends of which envelop kidney tissues called renal pyramids. The renal pyramids make up the internal core, or medulla, of the kidney. The medulla is surrounded by tissue with a different appearance, called the cortex. The renal artery and vein give rise to many arterioles and venules in the region between the cortex and the medulla. Each human kidney contains about a million nephrons, and their organization within the kidney is very regular. All of the glomeruli are located in the cortex. The initial segment of a renal tubule is called the proximal convoluted tubule-"proximal" because it is close to its glomerulus and "convoluted" because it is twisted. All the proximal convoluted tubules are also located in the cortex. At a certain point, the renal tubule takes a dive directly down into the medulla. The portion of the tubule in the medulla is called the loop of Henle. It is called a loop because it runs straight down into the medulla, makes a hairpin turn, and comes straight back to the cortex. Where the ascending limb of the loop of Henle reaches the cortex, it becomes the distal convoluted tubule-"distal" because it is farther from its glomerulus than the proximal tubule is. The distal convoluted tubules of many nephrons join a common collecting duct in the cortex. The collecting ducts then run in parallel with the loops of Henle down through the medulla and empty into the ureter at the tips of the renal pyramids.51.6.3 Blood vessels also have a regular arrangement in the kidney 919The organization of the blood vessels of the kidney closely parallels the organization of the nephrons. Arterioles branch from the renal arteriy and radiate into the cortex. An afferent arteriole carries blood to each glomerulus. Draining each glomerulus is an efferent arteriole that gives rise to the peritubular capillaries, most of which surround the cortical portions of the tubules. A few peritubular capillaries run into the medulla in parallel with the loops of Henle and the collecting ducts. These capillaries form the vasa recta. All the peritubular capillaries from a nephron join back together into a venule that joins with venules from other nephrons and eventually leads to the renal vein, which takes blood from the kidney.51.6.4 The volume of glomerular filtration is greater than the volume of urine 920Most of the water and solutes filtered in the glomerulus are resorbed and do not appear in the urine. We can reach this conclusion by comparing the rate of filtration by the glomeruli with the rate of urine production. The kidneys receive about 1 liter of blood per minute, or more than 1,400 liters of blood per day. How much of this huge volume is filtered in the glomeruli? The answer is about 12 percent. This is still a largevolume-180 liters per day! Since we normally urinate 2 to 3 liters per day, about 98 to 99 percent of the fluid volume that is filtered in the glomerulus is resorbed into the blood. Where and how is this enormous fluid volume resorbed?51.6.5 Most filtrate is resorbed by the proximal convoluted tubule 920The proximal convoluted tubule is responsible for most of the resorption of water and solutes from the glomerular filtrate. The cells of this section of the renal tubule are cuboidal, and their surfaces facing into the tubule have thousands of microvilli, which greatly increase their surface area for resorption. These cells have lots of mitochondria-an indication that they are biochemically active. They actively transport Na+ (with Cl- following passively) and other solutes, such as glucose and amino acids, out of the tubule fluid. Almost all glucose and amino acid molecules that are filtered from the blood are actively resorbed by these cells and transported back into the tissue fluid. The active transport of solutes into the tissue fluid causes water to follow osmotically. The water and solutes moved into the tissue fluid are taken up by the peritubular capillaries and returned to the venous blood leaving the kidney. Despite the large volume of water and solutes resorbed by the proximal convoluted tubule, the overall concentration, or osmolarity, of the fluid that enters the loop of Henle is not different from that of the blood plasma, although its composition is quite different. How, then, does the kidney produce urine that is hypertonic to the blood plasma?51.6.6 The loop of Henle creates a concentration gradient in the surrounding tissue 920Humans can produce urine that is four times more concentrated than their blood plasma. The vampire bat we encountered at the beginning of this chapter can produce a urine that is twenty times more concentrated than its blood plasma, and some desert-dwelling animals, as we will see, can produce even greater concentrations. This concentrating ability of the mammalian kidney is due to the loops of Henle, which function as a countercurrent multiplier system. The term "countercurrent" refers to the fact that tubule fluid in the descending limb of the loop flows in the opposite direction from that in the ascending limb. "Multiplier" refers to the ability of this system to create a concentration gradient in the renal medulla. The loops of Henle do not themselves produce a concentrated urine; rather, they increase the solute potential of the surrounding tissue fluid. The segments of the loop of Henle differ anatomically and functionally. Cells of the descending limb and the initial cells of the ascending limb are flat, with no microvilli and few mitochondria. They are not specialized for transport. Partway up the ascending limb, the cells become specialized for active transport. They are cuboidal and have lots of mitochondria. Accordingly, the loop of Henle is divided into the thin descending limb, the thin ascending limb, and the thick ascending limb. To understand the countercurrent multiplier mechanism, it is easiest to move backward through the renal tubule, starting with the thick ascending limb. The thick ascending limb actively resorbs Cl- (with Na+ following passively) from the tubule fluid and moves it into the surrounding tissue fluid. The thick ascending limb is not permeable to water, so the resorption of Na+ and Cl- raises the concentration of these solutes in the surrounding tissue fluid. The thin descending limb, in contrast, is rather permeable to water, but not very permeable to Na+ and Cl-. Since the surrounding tissue fluid has been made more concentrated by the Na+ and Cl- resorbed from the neighboring thick ascending limb, water is withdrawn osmotically from the tubule fluid in the descending limb. Therefore, the fluid in the descending limb becomes more and more concentrated as it flows toward the bottom of the renal medulla. The thin ascending limb, like the thick ascending limb, is not permeable to water. It is, however, permeable to Na+ and Cl-. As the concentrated tubule fluid flows up the thin ascending limb, it is more concentrated than the surrounding tissue fluid, so Na+ and Cl- diffuse out of it. When the tubule fluid reaches the thick ascending limb, active transport continues to move Na+ and Cl- from the tubule fluid to the tissue fluid, as we saw above. As a result of the processes described above, the tubule fluid reaching the distal convoluted tubule is less concentrated than the blood plasma, and the solutes that have been left behind in the renal medulla have created a concentration gradient in the surrounding tissue fluid. The tissue fluid of the renal medulla becomes more and more concentrated as we move from the border with the cortex down to the tips of the renal pyramids.51.6.7 Urine is concentrated in the collecting ducts 920As Na+ and Cl- are transported out of the tubule fluid, urea and other waste products make up a greater proportion of its total solute content as it flows toward the collecting duct. Therefore, the tubule fluid entering the collecting duct is at the same concentration as the blood plasma, but its composition is considerably different from that of the plasma. The tubule fluid entering the distal convoluted tubule loses water osmotically as it flows toward the collecting duct. The concentration gradient established in the renal medulla by the loops of Henle enables the urine to be concentrated in the collecting ducts. The collecting ducts begin in the renal cortex and run through the renal medulla before emptying into the ureter at the tips of the renal pyramids. As the solute concentration of the surroundingtissue fluid increases, more and more water is absorbed from the urine in the collecting duct. By the time it reaches the ureter, the urine has been greatly concentrated. It follows from the process we have just described that the ability of a mammal to concentrate its urine will be determined by the maximum concentration gradient it can establish in its renal medulla. One way to increase the concentration gradient is to increase the lengths of the loops of Henle. That is precisely the adaptation we find in mammals that live in extremely arid habitats. The desert gerbil, for example, has such extremely long loops of Henle that its renal pyramid (each of its kidneys has only one, in contrast to ours) extends far out of the concave surface of the kidney and into the ureter. These animals are so effective in conserving water that they can survive on the water released by the metabolism of their dry food; they do not need to drink!51.6.8 Treating kidney failure 920The function of the kidneys is to regulate the volume, the osmolarity, and the chemical composition of the blood, and indirectly, of the tissue fluid. If the tissue fluid does not have the right composition to meet the needs of the cells of the body, the cells cannot survive. Sudden and complete loss of kidney function is called acute renal failure. It results in the retention of salts and water (and hence high blood pressure), as well as the retention of urea (uremic poisoning) and metabolic acids (acidosis). A person who suffers acute renal failure will die in a week or two if not treated. A kidney transplant is a drastic but effective treatment, but it is usually necessary to maintain the patient in a healthy condition for a considerable time while waiting and preparing for the transplant. For this purpose, the older treatment option of dialysis is used.Dialysis can compensate for acute renal failure and even surgical removal of the kidneys. In a dialysis unit, or artificial kidney, the blood of the patient and a dialyzing fluid come into very close contact, separated only by a semipermeable membrane. This membrane allows metabolic waste products to diffuse from the patient's blood into the dialysis fluid. 51.7 Control and Regulation of Kidney Functions 921Control and regulatory mechanisms act on the kidneys to maintain blood osmolarity and blood pressure. We will discuss these various mechanisms separately, but keep in mind that they are always working together.51.7.1 The kidneys act to maintain the glomerular filtration rate 921If the kidneys stop filtering blood, they cannot accomplish any of their functions. The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) depends on an adequate blood supply to the kidneys at an adequate blood pressure. Therefore, the kidneys have mechanisms to maintain their blood supply and blood pressure regardless of what is happening elsewhere in the body. Because these adaptations of the kidney support the maintenance of kidney function, they are called autoregulatory mechanisms. The kidney's autoregulatory adjustments compensate for decreases in cardiac output or decreases in blood pressure so that the GFR remains high. One autoregulatory mechanism is the dilation (expansion) of the afferent renal arterioles when blood pressure falls. This dilation decreases the resistance in the arterioles and helps maintain blood pressure in the glomerular capillaries. If arteriole dilation does not keep the GFR from falling, then the kidney releases an enzyme, renin, into the blood. Renin acts on a circulating protein to begin converting it into an active hormone called angiotensin. Angiotensin has several effects that help restore the GFR to normal. First, angiotensin causes the efferent renal arterioles to constrict, which elevates blood pressure in the glomerular capillaries. Second, it causes peripheral blood vessels all over the body to constrict-an action that elevates central blood pressure. Third, it stimulates the adrenal cortex to release the hormone aldosterone. Aldosterone stimulates sodium resorption by the kidney, thereby making the resorption of water more effective. Enhanced water resorption helps maintain blood volume and therefore central blood pressure. Finally, angiotensin acts on structures in the brain to stimulate thirst. Increased water intake in response to thirst increases blood volume and blood pressure.51.7.2 Blood pressure and osmolarity are regulated by ADH 922When you lose blood volume, your blood pressure tends to fall. Besides activating the kidney autoregulatory mechanisms described in the previous section, a drop in blood pressure decreases the activity of the stretch sensors in the walls of the aorta and the carotid arteries (see Chapter 49). These stretch sensors provide information to cells in the hypothalamus that produce antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also called vasopressin) and send it down their axons to the posterior pituitary gland (see Chapter 41). As stretch sensor activity decreases, the production and release of this hormone increases. ADH acts on the collecting ducts of the kidney to increase their permeability to water. When the circulating level of ADH is high, the collecting ducts are very permeable to water, more water is resorbed from the urine, and only small quantities of concentrated urine are produced, thus conserving blood volume and blood pressure. When ADH levels are low, water is not resorbed from the collecting ducts, and lots of dilute urine is produced.ADH controls the permeability of the collecting ducts by stimulating the production and activity of membrane proteins that form water channels. These proteins, called aquaporins, are found in many tissues that are permeable to water-for example, the capillary endothelium, red blood cells, and the proximal convoluted tubules of the kidney. Differences among tissues in water permeability can be related to the presence or absence of aquaporins. Aquaporins are expressed in the descending limb of the loop of Henle, for example, but not in the ascending limb. One particular aquaporin is found in collecting duct cells and is controlled by ADH on both a long-term and a short-term basis. Over the long term, ADH levels influence the expression of the gene for this aquaporin; over the short term, ADH controls the insertion of the aquaporin into the cell membranes. ADH also helps regulate blood osmolarity. Sensors in the hypothalamus monitor the solute potential of the blood. If blood osmolarity increases, these osmosensors stimulate increased release of ADH to enhance water resorption from the kidneys. The osmosensors also stimulate thirst. The resulting water retention and water intake dilutes the blood as it expands blood volume.51.7.3 The heart produces a hormone that influences kidney function 922When blood pressure becomes abnormally high, or when a weakened heart cannot pump blood effectively, the atria of the heart become stretched. When the atrial muscle fibers are stretched too much, they release a peptide hormone called atrial natriuretic hormone. This hormone enters the circulation, and when it reaches the kidney, it decreases the resorption of sodium. The result is an increased loss of sodium and water, which has the effect of lowering blood volume and blood pressure.51.7.4 The kidneys help regulate acid-base balance 923Besides salt and water balance and nitrogen excretion, the kidneys have another important role in regulating the hydrogen ion concentration (the pH) of the blood. pH is a critical variable because it influences the structure and therefore the function of proteins. One way to minimize pH changes in a chemical solution is to add a buffer-a substance that can either absorb excess hydrogen ions or supply hydrogen ions. The major buffer in the blood is the bicarbonate ion, HCO3-, which is formed from the disassociation of carbonic acid, which in turn is formed by the hydration of CO2 according to the following equilibrium reactions (see Chapter 48). You can see that if excess H+ ions are added to this reaction mix, the reaction will move to the left and absorb the excess H+. On the other hand, if H+ ions are removed from the reaction mix, the reaction will move to the right and supply more H+ ions. The bicarbonate buffer system is important for controlling the pH of the blood because it can be pushed and pulled physiologically. The lungs control the levels of CO2 in the blood, and the kidneys control the levels of H+ and HCO3- ions in the blood. The renal tubules secrete H+ and resorb HCO3-. The kidney has other buffering systems as well, and together they greatly enhance the ability of the kidney to eliminate acid.52 Animal BehaviorA troop of Japanese macaques living on an island was being studied by scientists, who fed the monkeys by throwing pieces of sweet potatoes onto the beach from a passing boat. The monkeys tried to brush the sand off the sweet potatoes, but they were still gritty. One day a young female monkey began taking her sweet potatoes to the water and washing them. Soon her siblings and other juveniles in her play group imitated her new behavior. Next their mothers, too, began washing their potatoes. No adult males imitated the behavior of the juveniles or the adult females, but young males did learn the behavior from their mothers and their siblings. The scientists were fascinated by the way the creative, insightful behavior of one juvenile female spread through the population, so they presented the monkeys with a new challenge: They threw wheat onto the beach. Picking grains of wheat out of the sand was tedious and difficult. The same juvenile female came up with a solution: She carried handfuls of sand and grain to the water and threw them in. The sand sank, and the grain floated, enabling her to skim it off the surface and eat it. This behavior spread through the population in the same way potato washing did, first to other juveniles, then to mothers, and then from mothers to both their male and female offspring. The macaques now routinely wash their food. They play in the water, which they did not do before, and they have added some marine items to their diets. Clearly, this population of monkeys has invented new behaviors that have spread by imitative learning and have become traditions in the population. One could say that they have acquired a culture: a set of behaviors shared by the population and transmitted by learned traditions.The reason this study of macaques is so interesting is that it erodes what seemed to be a clear distinction between human behavior and the behavior of other animals. The behavior of most animals is largely determined by heredity, with learning playing a relatively minor role. In contrast, most human behaviors are acquired through cultural traditions and learning. The fact that other primates can invent novel behaviors and pass them on culturally shows that there is no absolute dividing line between human and animal behavior. We begin this chapter with descriptions of some classic studies of behaviors that are largely shaped by inheritance, but to varying degrees are modified by experience. Then we explore how hormones influence the development and expression of behavior. Next we discuss animal communication, showing how this behavior has been shaped by natural selection. Then we look at studies of biological rhythms and navigation to see how the mechanisms underlying these behaviors have been investigated. Throughout the chapter, we hope you will use what you read to raise your own questions about human behavior, to which we will return at the end.  52.1 What, How, and Why QuestionsMost species of animals can be identified by their behaviors. Behavior is highly visible and shows us what an animal does: how it gets food, how it avoids dangers in the environment, and how it reproduces. Behavior is highly adaptive, and it is therefore not surprising that many behaviors are shaped by natural selection, and are highly species-specific. On the other hand, flexibility of behavior can be extremely valuable to an animal that has to deal with changing conditions and complex situations, as in social interactions. Therefore, to varying degrees, behavior is modifiable by learning. In studying any behavior, we can ask what, how, and why questions. What questions focus on the details of behavior, including the proximate cause of the behavior-in other words, what stimuli cause the animal to express the behavior. How questions are about the mechanisms of behavior-the underlying neural, hormonal, and anatomical mechanisms that we have been studying in Part Six. How questions can also focus on the means by which an animal acquires a behavior-the relative roles of genetically determined mechanisms and experience. Most behaviors involve complex interactions of inherited anatomical and physiological mechanisms and the ability to alter behavior through learning. Why questions have to do with the ultimate causes of behavior-the selective pressures that shaped its evolution. In this chapter we will frequently discuss the adaptive nature of behavior, but the evolution of behavior will be the major focus of the next chapter. 52.2 Behavior Shaped by InheritanceMuch of the behavior of many animals is highly stereotypic (it is performed in the same way every time) and species-specific (there is little variation in the way different individuals of the same species perform it). We can identify species of spiders, for example, by their web designs. Web spinning requires thousands of movements performed in just the right sequence, and for a given species, most of that sequence is performed the same way every time. Different spider species spin webs of different designs, using different sequences of movements. Web spinning by spiders is also an example of a complex behavior that requires no learning or prior experience. When juvenile spiders hatch, their mother is already dead, and they disperse immediately (remember Charlotte's Web by E. B. White?). They have no experience of their mother's web. Yet, when they construct their own webs, they do it perfectly without the benefit of experience or a model to copy. In fact, their web spinning behavior is actually rather resistant to modification by learning. When confronted experimentally with challenges to web construction, young spiders appear incapable of learning how to modify the design of their webs. Many classic studies of stereotypic and species-specific behaviors were performed by scientists who studied the behavior of animals in nature-a field called ethology. The early ethologists asked to what extent such behaviors are determined by inheritance and to what extent they are modifiable by experience. Two experimental approaches were used to test whether behaviors are hereditary: (1) depriving animals of opportunities to learn and (2) studying the behavior of the offspring of two parents that differ in their behavior.52.2.1 Deprivation and hybridization experiments test whether a behavior is inheritedIn a deprivation experiment, an animal is reared so that it is deprived of all experience relevant to the behavior under study. In one such experiment, a tree squirrel was reared in isolation, on a liquid diet, and in a cage without soil or other particulate matter. When the young squirrel was given a nut, it put the nut in its mouth and ran around the cage. Eventually it made stereotypic digging movements in the corner of its cage, placed the nut in the imaginary hole, went through the motions of refilling the hole, and ended by tamping the nonexistent soil with its nose. The squirrel had never handled a food object and had never experienced soil, yet the stereotypic behavior of a squirrel burying a nut was fully expressed. In a hybridization experiment, closely related species are interbred and the behavior of their offspring observed. Closely related species frequently show distinct differences in certain kinds of behavior. When such species can be interbred, it is possible to to see whether their offspring have inherited elements of the behavior of one or both parents.Konrad Lorenz, a pioneer in the field of ethology, conducted hybridization experiments on ducks to investigate the genetic determinants of their elaborate courtship displays. Dabbling duck species such as mallards, teals, pintails, and gadwalls are closely related to one another and can interbreed, but because of the specificity of their courtship displays, they rarely do so in nature. Each male duck performs a carefully choreographed water ballet that is typical of his species, and a female is not likely to accept his advances unless the entire display is successfully and correctly completed. When Lorenz crossbred duck species, he found that the hybrid offspring expressed some components of the courtship displays of each parent species, but expressed them in new combinations. Of particular interest was his observation that the hybrids sometimes showed display components that were not in the repertoire of either parent species, but were characteristic of the displays of other species. Lorenz's hybridization studies clearly demonstrated that the motor patterns of the courtship displays were inherited. The fact that natural selection was shaping these genetically determined behaviors was evidenced by the fact that females were not interested in males performing hybrid displays.52.2.2 Simple stimuli can trigger behaviorsIf a behavior is not expressed during a deprivation experiment, it may nonetheless have genetic determinants. The right conditions may not have been available to stimulate the behavior during the experiment. The squirrel described above, for example, had to be given a nut for its digging and burying behaviors to be triggered. Specific stimuli are required to elicit the expression of many inherited behaviors. Two pioneering ethologists, Konrad Lorenz and Niko Tinbergen, who conducted classic studies of the nature of the stimuli that elicit such behaviors, called such stimuli releasers. Releasers are usually a simple subset of all the sensory information available to an animal. Adult male European robins, for example, have red feathers on their breasts, which serve as releasers of aggressive behavior in other males. During the breeding season, the sight of an adult male robin stimulates another male robin to sing, perform aggressive displays, and attack the intruder if he does not heed these warnings. An immature male robin, whose feathers are all brown, does not elicit this aggressive behavior. A tuft of red feathers on a stick, however, is a sufficient releaser for male aggressive behavior in robins.Tinbergen and A. C. Perdeck carefully examined the releasers involved in the interactions between herring gulls and their chicks during feeding. An adult herring gull has a red dot at the end of its bill. When the gull returns to its nest with food, the chicks peck at the red dot, thereby stimulating the adult to regurgitate the food for the chicks to eat. Tinbergen and Perdeck hypothesized that the red dot was a releaser for the chicks' begging behavior. To test their hypothesis, they made paper cutout models of gull heads and bills, varying the colors and the shapes. Then they rated each model according to how many pecks it received from naive, newly hatched chicks. The shape or color of the model head made no difference. In fact, a head was not even necessary; the chicks responded just as well to models of bills alone-as long as they had the red dot. Surprisingly, the most effective releaser for chick pecking behavior was a long, thin object with a dark tip that bore no resemblance to an adult herring gull. Clearly the chicks had inherited the ability to recognize a simple stimulus and respond to it with their also inherited begging behavior. To the ethologists, this represented an excellent example of a behavior that was genetically determined rather than learned.52.2.3 Learning also shapes behaviorFor their very significant contributions to our understanding of animal behavior, three ethologists, Lorenz, Tinbergen, and Karl von Frisch (whose work on honeybees you will encounter later in this chapter) shared a Nobel Prize in 1973. New generations of behavioral biologists, however, have moved beyond the ethologists' focus on inherited behavior to show that most behavior actually involves an interaction between inheritance and learning. The begging behavior of gull chicks is a case in point. Although newly hatched chicks respond maximally to simplistic artificial releasers, they gradually learn to discriminate between models and real gull heads, and they eventually beg only from their own parents. Thus, the inherited ability to recognize a simple releaser is subsequently refined by learning. The early ethologists did not ignore learning or deny that it took place; in fact, they pioneered the study of learning. Tinbergen performed an early study of spatial learning, by which an animal learns to recognize features in its environment. In a classic experiment, he placed objects such as pine cones near the entrance of a nest dug by a female digger wasp. After the wasp left her nest, he moved the objects a short distance away. Upon returning, the wasp oriented to the moved objects and could not find her nest entrance. She had learned to recognize objects in the environment to use as orientation cues. More recently, spatial learning has been studied in animals such as squirrels, chickadees, and jays that cache food items in hundreds and even thousands of locations. Their capacity for learning and remembering where their food is cached is phenomenal.52.2.4 Imprinting is the learning of a complex releaser Releasers are generally simple subsets of the available information because there are limits to what can be programmed genetically. A type of learning called imprinting makes it possible to learn, during a limited critical period, a complex set of stimuli that can later serve as a releaser. The classic example is the imprinting of offspring on their parents and parents on their offspring to ensure individual recognition even in a crowded situation such as a colony or a herd. When Lorenz incubated goose eggs in an incubator, and he was the first thing the goslings saw when they hatched, they imprinted on him, following him everywhere and interacting with him as if he were their parent. When the experiment was repeated by his assistants, each wearing boots with a different design, the goslings imprinted on the boots, and would follow only a person wearing the boots they first saw when they hatched. The critical period for imprinting is determined by a developmental or hormonal state and can be quite brief. If a mother goat, for example, does not nuzzle and lick her newborn within 5 to 10 minutes after birth, she will not recognize it as her own later. In this case, imprinting depends on olfactory cues, and the critical period is determined by the high levels of the hormone oxytocin circulating in the mother at the time of birth.52.2.5 Inheritance and learning interact to producebird songMany behavior patterns are intricate interactions of inheritance and learning. One example that has been the subject of some elegant experiments is bird song. Adult male songbirds use a species-specific song in territorial displays and courtship. A few species, such as the song sparrow, express their species-specific song even during deprivation experiments, but most species do not. For most species, such as the white-crowned sparrow, learning is an essential step in the acquisition of song. If the eggs of white-crowned sparrows are hatched in an incubator and the young male birds are reared in isolation, their adult songs will be unusual assemblages of sounds, not the typical species-specific song 7 a,b). This species cannot express its species-specific song without being imprinted on that song as a nestling. But even though the male white-crowned sparrow must hear the song of his own species as a nestling to sing it as an adult, he does not sing it as a juvenile. Instead, he uses his auditory imprinting as a nestling to form a song memory in his nervous system. As the young male sparrow approaches sexual maturity the following spring, he tries to sing, and eventually he matches his imprinted song memory through trial and error. If a bird that has heard his species-specific song as a juvenile is deafened before he begins to express his song, he will not develop his species-specific song 7c). The bird must be able to hear himself to match his song memory. If he is deafened after he expresses his correct song, he will continue to sing like a normal bird. Two periods of learning are essential: the first in the nestling stage, the second as the bird approaches sexual maturity. What a bird can learn during its critical period is limited, as revealed by experiments on hand-reared chaffinches that were played various tape recordings of bird song as nestlings. If exposed to the songs of other species, the chaffinches did not learn them. They also did not learn a chaffinch song played backward or with the elements scrambled. Even if they heard a chaffinch song played in pure tones, they did not form a song memory. However, if they heard a normal chaffinch song along with all these other sounds, they developed song memories and learned to sing their species-specific song the following spring. Thus the chaffinch inherits the ability to recognize the appropriate song to learn and when to learn it.52.2.6 Genetically determined behavior is adaptive under certain conditionsThe ability to learn and to modify behavior as a result of experience is often highly adaptive. Most human behavior is the result of learning. Why, then, are so many behavior patterns in so many species genetically determined? We have already touched on one answer to this question: If role models and opportunities to learn are not available-as in species with nonoverlapping generations, such as spiders-then there is no alternative to inherited behavior. Inherited behaviors are also adaptive when mistakes are costly or dangerous. Mating with a member of the wrong species is a costly mistake; thus the function of much courtship behavior, such as that of dabbling ducks, is to guarantee species recognition. In an environment in which incorrect as well as correct models exist, learning the wrong pattern of courtship behavior would be possible.Behavior patterns used for avoidance of predators or capture of dangerous prey allow no room for mistakes. If the behavior is not performed promptly and accurately the first time, there may not be a second chance. Thus, inherited behavior is highly adaptive for species that have little opportunity to learn, for species that might learn the wrong behavior, and in situations in which mistakes are costly or dangerous. 52.3 Hormones and BehaviorAll behavior depends on the nervous system for initiation, coordination, and execution. Frequently, however, it is the endocrine system, through its controlling influences on the development and the physiological state of the animal, that determines when a particular behavior is performed, and even when certain behaviors can be learned. In this section we will present two complex cases in which hormones control the development, learning, and expression of behavior: sexual behavior in rats and maturation of the brain regions required for song learning and expression in birds.52.3.1 Sex steroids determine the development and expression of sexual behavior in ratsDifferences in the behavior of males and females of a species are clear examples of genes influencing the development and expression of behavior. Such sex differences in behavior are the result of actions of the sex steroids on the brain. Rats, like most other animals, have stereotypic sexual behaviors. A female rat in estrus (receptive to males) responds to a tactile stimulus of her hindquarters by assuming a mating posture called lordosis. A male rat encountering a female in estrus engages in stereotypic copulatory behavior. The roles of genes and sex steroids in the development and expression of lordosis and male copulatory behavior have been investigated through experiments that manipulated the exposure of the developing and adult rat brain to sex steroids. Experiments led to three conclusions: Sex steroids are necessary for adult rats to express sexual behavior. Moreover, the male sex steroid, testosterone, has an effect only in males, and the female sex steroid, estradiol, has an effect only in females. Development of male sexual behavior requires the brain of the newborn rat to be exposed to testosterone, but development of female sexual behavior does not require the neonatal brain to be exposed to estradiol. Neonatal exposure to testosterone masculinizes the nervous systems of both genetic males and females so that they express male sexual behavior as adults. Thus, the sex steroids that are present during development determine which pattern of sexual behavior develops, and the sex steroids that are present in adulthood determine whether that pattern is expressed.52.3.2 Testosterone affects the development of the brain regions responsible for song in birdsAs we saw above, learning is essential for the acquisition of bird song. Both male and female birds hear their species-specific song as nestlings, but only the males of most songbird species sing as adults. Male birds use song to claim territory, compete with other males, and declare dominance. They also use song to attract females, which suggests that the females know the song of their species even if they do not sing. Do sex steroids control the learning and expression of song in male and female songbirds? After leaving the nest where they heard their father's song, young songbirds from temperate and arctic habitats migrate and associate with other species in mixed flocks. During this time they do not sing, and they do not hear their species-specific song again until the following spring. As that spring approaches and the days become longer, the young male's testes begin to grow and mature. As his testosterone level rises, he begins to try to sing. Even if he is isolated at this time from all other males of his species, his song will gradually improve until it is a proper rendition of his species-specific song. At that point the song is crystallized-the bird expresses it in similar form every spring thereafter. The young male's brain has learned the pattern of the song by hearing his father. During the subsequent spring, under the influence of testosterone, he learns to express that song-a behavior that then becomes rigidly fixed in his nervous system.Why don't the females of most songbird species sing? Can't they learn the patterns of their species-specific song? Do they lack the muscular or nervous system capabilities necessary to sing? Or do they simply lack the hormonal stimulus for developing the behavior? To answer these questions, investigators injected female songbirds with testosterone in the spring. In response to these injections, the females developed their species-specific song and sang just as the males did. Apparently females learn the song pattern of their species when they are nestlings and have the capability to express it, but they normally lack the hormonal stimulation. What does testosterone do to the brain of the songbird? A remarkable discovery revealed that testosterone causes the parts of the brain necessary for learning and expressing song to grow larger 10). Each spring, certain regions of the males' brains grow. Individual neurons increase in size and grow longer extensions, and the numbers of neurons in those regions of the brain increase. Such research on the neurobiology of bird song has revealed that hormones can control behavior by influencing brain structure as well as brain function, both developmentally and seasonally. 52.4 The Genetics of BehaviorTo say that behavior is inherited does not mean that specific genes code for specific behaviors. Genes code for proteins, and there are many complex steps between the expression of a gene as a protein product and the expression of a behavior. In no case are all the steps between a gene and its influence on a behavior known. Nevertheless, it is clear that behavior has genetic determinants. In this section we will look at three approaches to investigating how genes affect behavior: hybridization, artificial selection and crossing of the selected strains, and molecular analysis of genes and gene products.52.4.1 Hybridization experiments show whether a behavior is genetically determinedThe effects of hybridization on the courtship displays of duck species were the subject of a classic ethological experiment, as we saw above. A more recent set of hybridization experiments was performed on the songs of crickets. Crickets songs, like bird songs, are species-specific, and as in birds, only male crickets "sing." They do so by rubbing one wing against another that has a serrated edge. These sounds can be recorded and analyzed quantitatively. When two species of crickets were crossed, their offspring (the F1generation) expressed songs that had features of the songs of the two parental species. Backcrosses of F1 individuals with the parental species produced individuals that had songs closer to the parental species used in the backcross. Clearly the genetic background determined the song pattern. What was amazing, however, was the demonstration that female preferences for male songs were under similar genetic control. Given a choice, females from each parental species preferred the calls of males from their own species, but hybrid females preferred the calls of hybrid males. These genetic differences between the cricket species and the hybrids were reflected in the properties of their nervous systems. When specific neurons in the crickets' brains were stimulated, songs were expressed that reflected the genotypes of the crickets.52.4.2 Artificial selection and crossbreeding experiments reveal the genetic complexity of behaviorsDomesticated animals provide abundant evidence that artificial selection of mating pairs on the basis of their behavior can result in strains with distinct behavioral as well as anatomical characteristics. Among dogs, consider retrievers, pointers, and shepherds. Each has a particular behavioral tendency that can be honed to a fine degree by training. However, dogs and other large animals are not the best subjects for genetic studies. Most artificial selection experiments in behavioral genetics have been done on more convenient laboratory animals with short life cycles and large numbers of offspring. A favorite subject for behavioral genetic studies has been the fruit fly (Drosophila). Artificial selection has been successful in shaping a variety of behavior patterns in fruit flies, especially aspects of their courtship and mating behavior. Crossing of these artificially selected strains reveals that most of these behavioral differences are due to multiple genes that probably influence the behavior indirectly by altering general properties of the nervous system. Some single-gene effects, however, can be isolated. One example is the gene per (short for "period"), which alters the frequency of the wing vibrations that are part of the male's courtship display. The per gene is not a courtship behavior gene, however. It has subsequently been found that this gene codes for a transcription factor that plays an important role in the generation of daily rhythms of rest and activity, as we will see below. How it alters the development of wingbeat frequency is not clear.Few behavioral genetic studies reveal simple Mendelian segregation of behavioral traits. An exception is nest-cleaning behavior in honeybees. One genetic strain of honeybees practices nest-cleaning, or hygienic, behavior, which makes them resistant to a bacterium that infects and kills the larvae of honeybees. When a larva dies, workers uncap its brood cell and remove the carcass from the hive. Another strain of honeybees does not show this hygienic behavior and therefore is more susceptible to the spread of the disease. When these two strains of honeybees were crossed, the results indicated that the hygienic behavior was controlled by two recessive genes. All members of the F1 generation were nonhygienic, indicating that the behavior is controlled by recessive genes. Backcrossing the F1 with the hygienic strain produced the typical 3:1 ratio expected for a two-gene trait (see Chapter 10). The behavior of the nonhygienic hybrid individuals was very interesting. One-third of them showed no hygienic behavior at all; one-third uncapped the cells of dead larvae but did not remove them; and one-third did not uncap cells, but did remove carcasses if the cells were open. Even though these results appear to indicate a gene for uncapping and a gene for removal, these behavior patterns are complex. They involve sensory mechanisms, orientation movements, and motor patterns, each of which depends on multiple properties of many cells. The genetic deficits of nonhygienic bees could influence very small, specific, yet critical properties of some cells. If a single critical property, such as a crucial synapse or a particular sensory receptor, were lacking, the whole behavior would not be expressed. The responsible gene, then, is not a specific gene that codes for the entire behavior.52.4.3 Molecular genetics techniques reveal specific genes that influence behaviorThe techniques of molecular genetics are enabling scientists to investigate the functions of specific genes that influence behaviors. Male courtship behavior in fruitflies has been a subject of many such studies. This behavior is stereotypic, species-specific, and requires no learning. Males recognize potential mates, follow them, tap the female's body with their forelegs, extend and vibrate one wing, and lick the female's genitals. If the female is receptive, the male copulates with her 12a). Research in molecular genetics has now shown that most of this male courtship behavior is controlled by a single gene. In fruit flies with two X chromosomes (females), a gene called sex-lethal (sxl) is expressed. This gene is at the top of a genetic hierarchy that determines all aspects of sexual differentiation and behavior 12b). The Sxl protein causes another gene called transformer (tra) to produce the female-specific Tra protein. Fruit flies without the tra gene develop into males anatomically and behaviorally, regardless of how many X chromosomes they have. But it is still another gene in the sex determination hierarchy that is responsible for male behavior. The Tra protein controls two additional genes called doublesex (dsx) and fruitless (fru). The dsx gene mostly controls the anatomical differentiation of males, and fru causes the formation of a nervous system that expresses male courtship behavior. Mutations of the fru gene do not affect male body form, but they disrupt male courtship behavior. We don't know all of the actions that the male-specific Fru protein has in the development of the fruit fly nervous system, but this is about as close as we can get at present to identifying a gene that controls a complex behavior. 52.5 CommunicationCommunication is behavior that influences the actions of other individuals. It consists of displays or signals that can be perceived by other individuals and which convey information to them. Natural selection shapes displays or signals into systems of communication if the transmission of information benefits both the sender and the receiver. Thus, the ultimate cause of communication is the selective advantage it gives to individuals that engage in it. The courtship displays of a male, for example, benefit the male if they attract females, and they benefit the female if they allow her to assess whether the male is of the right species and whether he is strong, vigorous, and has other attributes that will make him a good father. A common mutual benefit of communication is the reduction of uncertainty about the status or intentions of the signaler. Even in aggressiveinteractions, reducing uncertainty helps both sender and receiver to avoid physical harm. Studies of communication can be complex because they must take into account the sender, the receiver, and the environment. The displays or signals that an animal can generate depend on its physiology and anatomy. Likewise, an animal's ability to perceive displays or signals depends on its sensory physiology and on the environment through which the display or signal must be transmitted. In Chapter 45, we learned how sensory systemsfunction in chemosensation, tactile sensation, audition, vision, and electrosensation. These are the channels of animal communication. In the discussion that follows, we will explore each of these five channels in turn.52.5.1 Chemical signals are durable but inflexibleMolecules used for chemical communication between individual animals are called pheromones. Because of the diversity of their molecular structures, pheromones can communicate very specific messages that contain a great deal of information. The mate attraction pheromone of the female silkworm moth is a good example. Male moths as far as several kilometers downwind are informed by these molecules that a female of their species is sexually receptive. By orienting to the wind direction and following the concentration gradient of the molecules, they can find her. Territory marking is another example in which detailed information is conveyed by chemical communication. Pheromonal messages left by mammals such as cats and dogs, for example, can reveal a great deal of information about the animal: species, individual identity, reproductive status, size (indicated by the height of the message), and when the animal was last in the area (indicated by the strength of the scent). An important feature of pheromones is that once they are released, they remain in the environment for a long time. By contrast, vocal or visual displays disappear as soon as the animal stops signaling or displaying. The durability of pheromonal signals enables them to be used to mark trails, as ants do, or to indicate directionality, as in the case of the moth sex attractant. However, it also means that the message cannot be changed rapidly. This inflexibility makes pheromonal communication unsuitable for a rapid exchange of information. The chemical nature and the size of the pheromonal molecule determine its speed of diffusion. The greater the speed of diffusion, the more rapidly the message gets out and the farther it will reach, but the sooner it will disappear. Trail-marking and territory-marking pheromones tend to be relatively large molecules that diffuse slowly; sex attractants tend to be small molecules that diffuse rapidly.52.5.2 Visual signals are rapid and versatile but are limited by directionalityVisual signals are easy to produce, come in an endless variety, can be changed very rapidly, and clearly indicate the position of the signaler. However, the extreme directionality of visual signals means that they are not the best means of getting the attention of a receiver. The sensors of the receiver must be focused on the signaler, or the message will be missed. Most animals are sensitive to light and can therefore receive visual signals, but sharpness of vision limits the detail that can be transmitted. The complexity of the environment also limits visual communication. Because visual communication requires light, it is not useful at night or in environments that lack light, such as caves and the ocean depths. Some species have surmounted this constraint on visual communication by evolving their own light-emitting mechanisms. Fireflies use a enzymatic mechanism to create flashes of light. By emitting flashes in species-specific patterns, fireflies can advertise for mates at night. Fireflies also illustrate how some species can exploit the communication systems of other species. There are predatory species of fireflies that mimic the mating flashes of other species. When an eager suitor approaches the signaling individual, it is eaten. Thus, deception can be part of animal communication systems, just as it is part of human use of language.52.5.3 Auditory signals communicate well over a distanceCompared with visual communication, auditory communication has advantages and disadvantages. Sound can be used at night and in dark environments. It can go around objects that would interfere with visual signals, so it can be used in complex environments like forests. It is better than visual signals at getting the attention of a receiver because the sensors do not have to be focused on the signaler for the message to be received. Like visual signals, sound can provide directional information, as long as the receiver has at least two sensors spaced somewhat apart. By maximizing or minimizing the features of the sounds they emit, animals can make their location easier or more difficult to determine. Sound is useful for communicating over long distances. Even though the intensity of sound decreases with distance from the source, loud sounds can be used to communicate over distances much greater than those possible with visual signals. An extreme example is the communication of whales. Some whales, such as the humpback, have very complex songs. When these sounds are produced at a certain depth (around 1,000 m), they can be heard hundreds of kilometers away. In this way, humpback whales can locate each other over vast areas of ocean. Auditory signals cannot convey complex information as rapidly as visual signals can, as the expression "A picture is worth a thousand words" implies. When individuals are in visual contact, an enormous amount of information is exchanged instantaneously (for example, species, sex, individual identity, reproductive status, level of motivation, dominance, vigor, alliances with other individuals, and so on). Coding that amount of information, with all of its subtleties, as auditory signals would take considerable time, thus increasing the possibility that the communicators could be located by predators. The animal world is relatively silent. Most invertebrates do not produce sound; cicadas and crickets are marvelous exceptions. Many amphibians, most fishes, and most reptiles produce no sound.52.5.4 Tactile signals can communicate complex messagesCommunication by touch is extremely common, although not always obvious. Animals in close contact use tactile interactions extensively, especially under conditions that do not favor visual communication. When eusocial insects such as ants, termites, or bees meet, they contact one another with their antennae and front legs. One of the best-studied uses of tactile communication, beginning with the pioneering work of ethologist Karl von Frisch, is the dance of honeybee. When a forager bee finds food, she returns to the hive and communicates her discovery to her hivemates by dancing in the dark on the vertical surface of the honeycomb. The dance is monitored by other bees, who follow and touch the dancer to interpret the message. If the food is less than 80-100 meters from the hive, the forager performs a round dance, running rapidly in a circle and reversing her direction after each circumference. The odor on her body indicates the flower to be looked for, but the dance contains no information about the direction to go-only that it is within 100 meters of the hive. If the food source is farther than 80-100 meters, the bee performs a waggle dance, which conveys information about both the distance and the direction of the food source. The bee repeatedly traces out a figure-eight pattern as she runs on the vertical surface. She alternates half-circles to the left and right with vigorous wagging of her abdomen in the short, straight run between turns. The angle of the straight run indicates the direction of the food source relative to the direction of the sun. The speed of the dancing indicates the distance to the food source: The farther away it is, the slower the waggle run.52.5.5 Electric signals can also communicate messagesSome species of fish have evolved the ability to generate electric fields in the water around them by emitting a series of electric pulses (see Chapter 45). These trains of electric pulses can be used for sensing objects in the immediate surroundings, and they can also be used for communication. An electrode connected to an amplifier and a speaker can be used to "listen" to the signals generated by glass knife fish in a tank. Each individual fish emits a pulse at a different frequency, and the frequency each fish uses relates to its status in the population. Males emit lower frequencies than females. The most dominant male has the lowest frequency, and the most dominant female has the highest frequency. When a new individual is introduced into thetank, the other individuals adjust their frequencies so that they do not overlap, and the signal of the new individual indicates its position in thehierarchy. In their natural environment-the murky waters of tropical rainforests-these fish can tell the identity, sex, and social position of another fish by its electric signals. Communication has been a very fruitful area for investigating the ultimate causes of behavior and how the resulting adaptations have been shaped by the environment. Next we will return to some studies of proximate causes of behavior to see some examples of how "how" questions can be addressed. 52.6 The Timing of Behavior: Biological RhythmsAmong the important proximate causes of behavior are those that determine its organization through time. The study of biological rhythms has led to major discoveries about brain mechanisms down to the molecular level that enable animals to organize their behavior in time. In the discussion that follows, we will examine two types of biological rhythms: circadian rhythms and circannual rhythms.52.6.1 Circadian rhythms control the daily cycle of behaviorOur planet turns on its axis once every 24 hours, creating a cycle of environmental conditions that has existed throughout the evolution of life. Daily cycles are characteristic of almost all organisms. What is surprising, however, is that this daily rhythmicity does not depend on the 24-hour cycle of light and dark. If animals are kept in constant darkness, at a constant temperature with food and water available all the time, they still demonstrate daily cycles of activity, sleeping, eating, drinking, and just about anything else that can be measured. This persistence of the daily cycle in the absence of changes between light and dark suggests that animals have an endogenous (internal) clock. Without time cues from the environment, however, these daily cycles are not exactly 24 hours long. They are therefore called circadian rhythms (from the Latin circa, "about," and dies, "day"). To discuss biological rhythms, we must introduce some terminology. A rhythm can be thought of as a series of cycles, and the length of one of those cycles is the period of the rhythm. Any point on the cycle is a phase of that cycle. Hence, when two rhythms completely match, they are in phase, and if a rhythm is shifted (as in the resetting of a clock), it is phase-advanced or phase-delayed. Since the period of a circadian rhythm is not exactly 24 hours, it must be phase-advanced or phase-delayed every day to remain in phase with the daily cycle of the environment.The process of resetting of the circadian rhythm by environmental cues is called entrainment. An animal kept in constant conditions will not be entrained to the 24-hour cycle of the environment, and its circadian clock will run according to its natural period-it will be free-running. If its period is less than 24 hours, the animal will begin its activity a little earlier each day. Animals with free-running circadian rhythms can be used in experiments to investigate the stimuli that phase-shift or entrain the circadian clock. Under natural conditions, environmental cues, such as the onset of light or dark, entrain the free-running rhythm to the 24-hour cycle of the real world. In the laboratory, it is possible to entrain circadian rhythms in free-running animals with short pulses of light or dark administered every 24 hours. When you fly across several time zones, your circadian clock is out of phase with the real world at your destination; the result is jet lag. Gradually your endogenous rhythm synchronizes itself with the real world as it is reentrained by environmental cues. Since your endogenous rhythm cannot be shifted by more than 30 to 60 minutes each day, it takes several days to reentrain your clock to real time in your new location. This period of reentrainment is the time during which you experience jet lag, because your endogenous rhythm is waking you up, making you sleepy, initiating activities in your digestive tract, and stimulating many other physiological functions at inappropriate times of the day.Where is the clock that controls the circadian rhythm? In mammals, the master circadian clock is located in two tiny groups of cells just above the optic chiasm, the place where the two optic nerves cross. These structures are called the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). If the SCN are destroyed, the animal loses circadian rhythmicity. Under constant conditions, the animal is equally likely to be active or asleep at any time of day. Recent experiments have shown that circadian rhythms of rest and activity can be restored in an animal whose SCN have been destroyed if it receives a transplant of those nuclei from another animal. In no other known case can a brain tissue transplant restore such a complex behavior. Since the restored rhythm has the period of the animal that donates the tissue, the transplant clearly controls the recipient's behavior. Circadian rhythms are found in every animal group, as well as in protists, plants, and fungi, but only vertebrates have SCN. Thus, natural selection has produced a variety of circadian clocks. In the mollusk Bulla, for example, the cells driving circadian behavior are in the eyes. Birds do have SCN, but the master clock of at least some species resides in the pineal gland, a mass of tissue between the cerebral hemispheres that produces the hormone melatonin. If the pineal gland of a bird is removed, the bird loses its circadian rhythm. In protists and fungi, circadian rhythmicity is a property of individual cells, and the individual cells of many multicellular animals can generate circadian rhythms. What are the molecular mechanisms of these circadian clocks?Enormous progress has been made in recent years toward discovering the molecular basis of circadian rhythms. The surprise is that there is a high degree of homology in the genes involved across a very wide range of organisms, from bread molds to humans. The story begins with a gene called per that was discovered in fruit flies, as mentioned above. Mutations of this gene cause flies to have either short or long circadian periods. Mutations of another circadian gene, called tim (short for "timeless"), cause a loss of circadian rhythms in fruit flies. The presence of mRNA for per and tim shows a daily cycle, as does the presence of the Per and Tim proteins. Thus, the transcription and translation of these two genes shows a circadian rhythm. But what controls the rhythm? The Per and Tim proteins dimerize in the cytoplasm, and the resulting heterodimer is translocated into the nucleus, where it acts as a transcription factor inhibiting the transcription of the per and tim genes. These two genes could thus be the wheels of a circadian clock. It is now known that the mechanism is not so simple, and that there are a number of other genes involved. What is interesting, however, is that homologies have been found between these clock genes in fungi, insects, mice, and humans, indicating how fundamental molecular clock mechanisms are to living organisms on Earth.52.6.2 Circannual rhythms control seasonal behaviorsIn addition to turning on its axis every 24 hours, our planet revolves around the sun once every 365 days. Because Earth is tilted on its axis, its revolution around the sun results in seasonal changes in day length at all locations except the equator (see Chapter 56). These changes secondarily create seasonal changes in temperature, rainfall, and other variables. Because the behavior of animals must adapt to these seasonal changes, animals must be able to anticipate the seasons and adjust their behavior accordingly. Most animals, for example, should not produce young in the winter. For many species, change in day length, or photoperiod, is areliable indicator of seasonal changes to come. If day length has a direct effect on the physiology and behavior of a species, that species is said to be photoperiodic. If male deer, for example, are held in captivity and subjected to two cycles of change in day length in one year, they will grow and drop their antlers twice during that year.For some animals, change in day length is not a reliable cue. Hibernators spend long months in dark burrows underground, away from any indicators of day length, but have to be physiologically prepared to breed almost as soon as they emerge in the spring. A bird overwintering in the Tropics cannot use changes in photoperiod as a cue to time its migration north to the breeding grounds. Hibernators and equatorial migrants have endogenous annual rhythms, called circannual rhythms. In other words, their nervous systems have a built-in calendar. Just as circadian rhythms are not exactly 24 hours long, circannual rhythms are not exactly 365 days long, but usually shorter. The brain mechanisms of circannual rhythms are completely unknown.52.7 Finding Their Way: Orientation and NavigationWithin a local environment, finding your way is not a problem. Like the wasps Tinbergen studied, you remember landmarks and organize your behavior spatially with respect to those reference points. Such orientation is a very common animal behavior. But what if the destination is a considerable distance away? How does an animal orient to it and find its way? Many animals navigate long distances through unfamiliar territory. In this section we describe modes of navigation and examine some of their underlying mechanisms.52.7.1 Piloting animals orient themselves by means of landmarksIn most cases an animal find its way using simple means: It knows and remembers the structure of its environment. It uses landmarks to find its nest, a safe hiding place, or a food source. Navigating by means of landmarks is called piloting. Gray whales, for example, migrate seasonally between the Bering Sea and the coastal lagoons of Mexico. They find their way by following the west coast of North America. Coastlines, mountain chains, rivers, water currents, and wind patterns can all serve as piloting cues. But some remarkable cases of long-distance orientation and movement cannot be explained by piloting.52.7.2 Homing animals can return repeatedly to a specific locationThe ability of an animal to return to a nest site, burrow, or other specific location is called homing. In most cases, homing is merely piloting in a known environment, but some animals are capable of much more sophisticated homing. People who breed and race homing pigeons take the pigeons from their home loft and release them at a remote site where they have never been before. The first pigeon that reaches its home wins the race. Data on departure directions, known flying speeds, and distances traveled show that homing pigeons fly fairly directly from the point of release to home. They do not randomly search until they encounter familiar territory. Scientists have used homing pigeons to investigate the mechanisms of navigation. One series of experiments tested the hypothesis that the pigeons depend on visual cues. Pigeons were fitted with frosted contact lenses so that they could see no details other than degree of light and dark. These pigeons still homed and fluttered down to the ground in the vicinity of their loft. Thus, they were able to navigate without visual images of the landscape.Marine birds provide many dramatic examples of homing over great distances in an environment where landmarks are rare. Many marine birds fly over hundreds of miles of featureless ocean on their daily feeding trips and then return directly to a nest site on a tiny island. Albatrosses display remarkable feats of homing. When a young albatross first leaves its nest on an oceanic island, it flies widely over the southern oceans for 8 or 9 years before it reaches reproductive maturity. At that time, it flies back to the island where it was raised to select a mate and build a nest. After the first mating season, the pair separate, and each bird resumes its solitary wanderings. The next year they return to the same nest site at the same time, reestablish their pair bond, and breed. Thereafter they return to the nest to breed every other year, spending many months in between at sea.52.7.3 Migrating animals travel great distances with remarkable accuracyFor as long as humans have inhabited temperate and subpolar latitudes, they must have been aware that whole populations of animals, especially birds, disappear and reappear seasonally-that is, they migrate. Not until the early nineteenth century, however, were patterns of migration established by marking individual birds with identification bands around their legs. Being able to identify individual birds in a population made it possible to demonstrate that the same birds and their offspring returned to the same breeding grounds year after year, and that these same birds were found during the nonbreeding season at locations hundreds or even thousands of kilometers from the breeding grounds. How do migrants find their way over such great distances? A reasonable hypothesis is that young birds on their first migration follow experienced birds and learn the landmarks by which they will pilot in subsequent years. However, adult birds of many species leave the breeding grounds before the young have finished fattening and are ready to begin their first migration. These naive birds must be able to navigate accurately on their own, and with little room for mistakes.52.7.3 Navigation is based on internal and environmental cuesSince many homing and migrating species are able to take direct routes to their destinations through areas they have never experienced, they must have mechanisms of navigation other than piloting. Humans use two systems of navigation: distance-and-direction navigation and bicoordinate navigation. Distance-and-direction navigation requires knowing the direction to the destination and how far away that destination is. With a compass to determine direction and a means of measuring distance, humans can navigate. Bicoordinate navigation, also known as true navigation, requires knowing the latitude and longitude (the map coordinates) of both the current position and the destination. From that information, a route can be plotted to the destination.distance-and-direction navigation.Researchers conducted an experiment with European starlings to determine their method of navigation. These birds migrate between their breeding grounds in the Netherlands and northern Germany and their wintering grounds to the southwest, in southern England and western France. The researchers captured birds on their breeding grounds, marked them, transported them to Switzerland-south of their breeding grounds-and released them. The researchers expected that if the starlings were using distance-and-direction navigation, the marked birds would be recovered in France and Spain, to the southwest of where they were released. Naive juvenile starlings did use distance-and-direction navigation, but experienced adult birds were less disrupted by their geographic displacement. How do animals determine distance and direction? In many instances, determining distance is not a problem as long as the animal recognizes its destination. Homing animals recognize landmarks and can pilot once they reach familiar areas. Evidence suggests that biological rhythms play a role in determining migration distances for some species. Birds kept in captivity display increased and oriented activity at the time of year when they would normally migrate. Such migratory restlessness has a definite duration, which corresponds to the usual duration of migration for the species. Since distance is determined by how long an animal moves in a given direction, the duration of migratory restlessness could set the distance for its migration.Two obvious means of determining direction are the sun and the stars. During the day, the sun is an excellent compass, as long as the time of day is known. In the Northern Hemisphere, the sun rises in the east, sets in the west, and points south at noon. As we have seen, animals can tell the time of day by means of their circadian clocks. Clock-shifting experiments have demonstrated that animals use their circadian clocks to determine direction from the position of the sun. Researchers placed birds in a circular cage that enabled them to see the sun and sky, but no other visual cues. Food bins were arranged around the sides of the cage, and the birds were trained to expect food in the bin at one particular direction-south, for example. After training, no matter what time they were fed, and even if the cage was rotated between feedings, the birds always went to the bin at the southern end of the cage for food, even if that bin contained no food. Next, the birds were placed in a room with a controlled light cycle, and their circadian rhythms were phase-shifted by turning the lights on at midnight. After about 2 weeks, the birds' circadian clocks had been phase-advanced by 6 hours. Then the birds were returned to the circular cage under natural light conditions, with sunrise at 6:00 A.M. Because of the shift in their circadian rhythms, their endogenous clocks were indicating noon at the time the sun came up.If food was always in the south bin, and it was sunup, the birds should have looked for food 90 degrees to the right of the direction of the sun. But since their circadian clocks were telling them it was noon, they looked for food in the direction of the sun-in the east bin. The 6-hour phase shift in their circadian clocks resulted in a 90-degree error in their orientation. These kinds of experiments on many species have shown that animals can orient by means of a time-compensated solar compass. Many animals are normally active at night; in addition, many day-active bird species migrate at night and thus cannot use the sun to determine direction. The stars offer two sources of information about direction: moving constellations and a fixed point. The positions of constellations change because Earth is rotating. With a star map and a clock, direction can be determined from any constellation. But one point that does not change position during the night is the point directly over the axis on which Earth turns. In the Northern Hemisphere, a star called Polaris, or the North Star, lies in that position and always indicates north.Stephen Emlen investigated whether birds use these sources of directional information from the stars. He raised young birds in a planetarium, where star patterns are projected on the ceiling of a large, domed room. The star patterns in the planetarium could be slowly rotated to simulate the rotation of Earth. If the star patterns were not rotated, birds caught in the wild could orient well in the planetarium, but birds raised in the planetarium under a nonmoving sky could not. If the star patterns in the planetarium were rotated each night as the young birds matured, they were able to orient in the planetarium, showing that birds can learn to use star patterns for orientation if the sky rotates. These experiments provided no evidence that the birds used their circadian clocks to derive directional information from the star patterns. Experienced birds were not confused by a still sky, or by a sky that rotated faster than normal. These birds were orienting to the fixed point in the sky, the North Star. Young birds raised under a sky that rotated around a different star imprinted on that star and oriented to it as if it were the North Star. These studies showed that birds raised in the Northern Hemisphere learn a star map that they can use for orientation at night by imprinting on the fixed point in the sky.Animals cannot use sun and star compasses when the sky is overcast, yet they still home and migrate under such conditions. Do other sources provide information they can use for orientation? There appears to be considerable redundancy in animals' abilities to sense direction. Pigeons are able to home as well on overcast days as on clear days, but this ability is severely impaired if small magnets are attached to their heads-evidence that the birds use a magnetic sense. Cells have been found in birds that contain small particles of the magnetic mineral magnetite, but the neurophysiology of the magnetic sense is largely unknown. Another possible cue is the plane of polarization of light, which can give directional information even under heavy cloud cover. Very low frequencies of sound can provide information about coastlines and mountain chains. Weather patterns can also provide considerable directional information.Bicoordinate navigation involves knowing where you are (in longitude and latitude) and where you want to go, and plotting an appropriate course. Longitude can be determined by the position of the sun and the time of day: If the sun comes up earlier than expected, you must be east of where you want to be, and if the sun comes up later than expected, then you are west of where you want to be. Time and sun position can give information about latitude as well. At a given time of day in the Northern Hemisphere, a sun position higher in the sky than expected indicates you are farther north than you want to be, and if the sun is lower in the sky than expected, you are north of where you want to be. Information about longitude and latitude can also come from sensing Earth's magnetic lines of force and from the positions of the stars. In spite of the remarkable navigational abilities of animals such as albatrosses, there is currently no evidence that animals use bicoordinate navigation. But, of course, it is not easy to do experiments on animals such as albatrosses! 52.8 Human BehaviorAs we saw early in this chapter, the behavior of an animal is a mixture of components that are inherited and components that can be molded by learning. However, even some aspects of learned behavior patterns-such as what can be learned and when it can be learned-have genetic determinants. Thus natural selection shapes not only the physiology and morphology of a species, but also its behavior. In some situations natural selection favors inherited behaviors; in others, learned behaviors. In many cases, the optimal adaptation is a mixture of inherited and learned behavioral components. Given these considerations, how would we characterize human behavior? An important characteristic of human behavior is the extent to which it can be modified by experience. The transmission of learned behavior from generation to generation-culture-is the hallmark of humans. Nevertheless, the structures and many functions of our brains are inherited, including drives, limits to and propensities for learning, and even some motor patterns. Biological drives such as hunger, thirst, sexual desire, and sleepiness are inherent in our nervous systems. Is it reasonable, therefore, to expect that emotions such as anger, aggression, fear, love, hate, and jealousy are solely the consequences of learning? Our sensory systems enable us to use certain subsets of information from the environment; similarly, the structure of our nervous systems makes it more or less possible to process certain types of information. Consider, for example, how basic and simple it is for an infant to learn spoken language, yet how many years that same child must struggle to master reading and writing. Verbal communication is deeply rooted in our evolutionary past, whereas reading and writing are relatively recent products of human culture.Some motor patterns seem to be programmed into our nervous systems. Studies of diverse human cultures from around the world reveal basic similarities of facial expressions and body language among human populations that have had little or no contact with one another. Infants born blind still smile, frown, and show other facial expressions at appropriate times, even though they have never observed such expressions in others. Acknowledging that aspects of our behavior have been shaped through evolution in no way detracts from the value we place on our ability to learn and the importance of cultural transmission of information to our species. Evenso, we are recognizing that culture, in its simplest form, is not uniquely human. In the introduction to this chapter we saw what has been characterized as pre-cultural behavior in Japanese macaques. Individuals invented new behaviors, and those new behaviors were transmitted by imitative learning through the population.In a recent study, scientists who have spent years studying chimpanzee behavior in seven widely separated areas of Africa compared their findings on chimpanzee behavior. They were able to identify 39 behaviors, ranging from tool use to courtship behavior, that were common in some populations but absent in others. Moreover, the variation in these behaviors was much greater between populations than within a population, and each population had a distinct repertoire of these behaviors. Just as human societies are characterized by different assemblages of culturally transmitted customs or customary behaviors, so are these chimpanzee populations. It is increasingly more difficult to draw a line between human behavior and animal behavior, especially that of our closest primate relatives. But why should we expect such a line to exist? We do not expect such a lack of continuity in molecular, biochemical, physiological, or anatomical characteristics. Similarly, human and animal behavior is on a continuum, and the challenge is to understand the common mechanisms and the reasons for quantitative differences.