9.1 Systems of Cell Reproduction 155In order for any cell to divide, four events must occur: There must be a reproductive signal. This signal, which may come either from inside or from outside the cell, initiates the cellular reproductive events; Replication of DNA, the genetic material, and other vital cell components must occur so that each of the two new cells will have complete cell functions; The cell must distribute (segregate) the replicated DNA to each of the two new cells; The cell membrane (and the cell wall, in organisms that have one) must grow to separate the two new cells in a process called cytokinesis.9.1.1 Prokaryotes divide by fission 155In prokaryotes, cell division often means reproduction of the entire single-celled organism. The cell grows in size, replicates its DNA, and then essentially divides into two new cells-a process called fission. The reproductive rates of many prokaryotes respond to conditions in the environment. The bacterium Escherichia coli, a species that is commonly used in genetic studies, is a "cell division machine" that essentially divides continuously. Typically, cell division takes 40 minutes at 37¡C. But if there are abundant sources of carbohydrates and salts available, the division cycle speeds up so that cells may divide in 20 minutes. Another bacterium, Bacillus subtilis, stops dividing under adverse nutritional conditions, then resumes dividing when things improve. These observations suggest that the initiation of cell division in prokaryotes is under the control of metabolic intermediates, such as carbohydrates, in the environment. replication of DNA. A chromosome, as we saw in Chapter 4, is a DNA molecule containing genetic information. When a cell divides, its chromosomes must be copied, or replicated, and each of the two resulting copies must find its way into one of the two new cells.
Most prokaryotes have only one chromosome, a single long DNA molecule with proteins bound to it. In the bacterium E coli, the DNA is a circular molecule about 1.6 million nm (1.6 mm) in circumference. The bacterium itself is only about 1 (m (1,000 nm) in diameter and about 4 (m long. Thus the long thread of DNA, which could form a circle over 100 times larger if fully expanded, is packed in a very small space. So it is not surprising that the molecule usually appears in electron micrographs as a hopeless tangle of fibers. The DNA molecule accomplishes some packing by folding in on itself, and positively charged (basic) proteins bound to negatively charged (acidic) DNA contribute to this packing. Circular chromosomes appear to be characteristic of all prokaryotes, as well as some viruses, and are also found in the chloroplasts and mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. Functionally, the prokaryotic DNA molecule has two regions that are important for cell reproduction: Ori is the origin of replication, where replication of the circle starts; Ter is the terminus of replication, where it ends. The process of chromosome replication occurs as the DNA is threaded through a "replication complex" of proteins at the center of the cell. DNA replication actively drives the parceling out of the two new DNA molecules to the new cells. The first region to be replicated is ori. The two ori regions are attached to the plasma membrane, and they separate as the new chromosome forms and new plasma membrane forms between them. By the end of replication, there are two chromosomes, one at either end of the rod-shaped E coli cell. Cell partition, or cytokinesis, begins 20 minutes after chromosome duplication is finished. The first event of cytokinesis is a pinching in of the plasma membrane to form a ring similar to a purse string. Fibers composed of a protein similar to eukaryotic tubulin (which makes up microtubules) are major components of this ring. As the membrane pinches in, new cell wall materials are synthesized, which finally separate the two cells.9.1.2 Eukaryotic cells divide by mitosis or meiosis 157Cell reproduction in eukaryotes also involves reproductive signals, DNA replication, segregation, and cytokinesis. But, as you might expect, events in eukaryotes are somewhat more complex. First, unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells do not constantly divide whenever environmental conditions are adequate. In fact, eukaryotic cells that have differentiated (become specialized) seldom divide. So the signals for cell division are related not to the physiology of the single cell, but to the needs of the entire organism. Second, instead of a single chromosome, eukaryotes usually have many (humans have 4, so the processes of replication and segregation, while basically the same as in prokaryotes, are more intricate. Third, eukaryotic cells have a distinct nucleus, which has to be replicated and then divided into two new nuclei. Finally, cytokinesis is different in plant cells (which have a cell wall) than in animal cells (which do not). Mitosis is a nuclear division mechanism that operates in most tyes of cells. Mitosis sorts the genetic material into two new nuclei and ensures that both contain exactly the same genetic information. A second mechanism of nuclear division, meiosis, occurs in the gametes-those cells that will contribute to the reproduction of a new organism. Meiosis generates diversity by shuffling the genetic material, resulting in new gene combinations. It plays a key role in sexual life cycles. The duplication of a eukaryotic cell typically consists of three steps: The replication of the genetic material within the nucleus; The packaging and separation of the genetic material into two new nuclei; The division of the cytoplasm. What determines whether a cell will divide? How does mitosis lead to identical cells, and meiosis to diversity? Why do we need both identical copies and diverse cells? Why do most eukaryotic organisms reproduce sexually? In the pages that follow, we will describe the details of mitosis, meiosis, and interphase, as well as their consequences for heredity, development, and evolution. 9.2 Interphase and the Control of Cell Division 157Between divisions of the cytoplasm-that is, for most of its life-a eukaryotic cell is in a condition called interphase. A cell lives and functions until it divides or dies-or, if it is a sex cell, until it fuses with another sex cell. Some types of cells, such as red blood cells, muscle cells, and nerve cells, lose the capacity to divide as they mature. Other cell types, such as cortical cells in plant stems, divide only rarely. Most cells, however, have some probability of dividing, and some are specialized for rapid division. For most types of cells, we may speak of a cell cycle that has two phases: mitosis and interphase. A given cell lives for one turn of the cell cycle and then becomes two cells. The cell cycle, when repeated again and again, is a constant source of new cells. However, even in tissues engaged in rapid growth, cells spend most of their time in interphase. Examination of any collection of dividing cells, such as the tip of a root or a slice of liver, will reveal that most of the cells are in interphase most of the time; only a small percentage of the cells will be in mitosis at any given moment. We can confirm this fact by watching a single cell through its entire cycle. In this section, we will describe the cell cycle events that occur during interphase, especially the "decision" to enter mitosis. Interphase consists of three subphases, identified as G1, S, and G2. The cell's DNA replicates during the S phase (the S stands for synthesis). The period between the end of mitosis and the onset of the S phase is called G1, or Gap 1. Another gap-G2-separates the end of the S phase and the beginning of mitosis, when nuclear and cytoplasmic division take place and two new cells are formed. Mitosis and cytokinesis are referred to as the M phase of the cell cycle. The process of DNA replication is a major topic by itself, and will be discussed in Chapter 11. But its result is, at the end of S phase, where there was formerly one chromosome, there are now two, joined together and awaiting segregation into two new cells by mitosis or meiosis. Although one key event-DNA replication-dominates and defines the S phase, important cell cycle processes take place in the gap phases as well. G1 is quite variable in length in different cell types. Some rapidly dividing embryonic cells dispense with it entirely, while other cells may remain in G1 for weeks or even years. The biochemical hallmark of a G1 cell is that it is preparing for the S phase. It is at the G1-to-S transition that the commitment to enter another cell cycle is made. During G2, the cell makes preparations for mitosis-for example, synthesizing components of the microtubules that will form the spindle.9.2.1 Cyclins and other proteins signal events in the cell cycle 158How are appropriate decisions to enter the S or M phases made? These transitions-from G1 to S and from G2 to M-depend on the activation of a protein called cyclin-dependent kinase,* or Cdk. A kinase is an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to another molecule; this phosphate transfer is called phosphorylation. Cdk is a kinase that can catalyze the phosphorylation of certain amino acids in proteins.* Activated Cdk's are important in initiating the steps of the cell cycle. *Phosphorylation changes the three-dimensional structure of the targeted protein, sometimes simultaneously changing that protein's function. This important biochemical process is discussed further in Chapters 12 and 15. The discovery that Cdk's induce cell division is a beautiful example of research on different organisms and different cell types converging on a single mechanism. One group of scientists was studying immature sea urchin eggs, trying to find out how they are stimulated to divide and form mature eggs. A protein called maturation promoting factor was purified from the maturing eggs, which by itself prodded the immature eggs into division. At the same time, other scientists studying the cell cycle in yeast, a single-celled eukaryote, found a strain that was stalled at the G1-S boundary because it lacked a Cdk. This yeast Cdk was very similar to the sea urchin's maturation promoting factor. Similar Cdk's were soon found to control the G1-S transition in many other organisms, including humans. But Cdk's are not active by themselves. They must be bound to a second type of protein, called cyclin. This binding-an example of allosteric interaction-causes the Cdk to alter its shape and exposes its active site. It is the cyclin-Cdk complex that acts as a protein kinase and triggers the transition from G1 to S phase. Then the cyclin breaks down and the Cdk becomes inactive.
Several different cyclin-Cdk combinations act at various stages of the mammalian cell cycle: Cyclin D-Cdk4 acts during the middle of G1. This is the restriction point, a key decision point beyond which the rest of the cell cycle is normally inevitable ; Cyclin E-Cdk2 acts at the G1-S boundary, initiating DNA replication; Cyclin A-Cdk2 acts during S, and also stimulates DNA replication; Cyclin B-Cdk1 acts at the G2-M boundary, initiating the transition to chromosome condensation and mitosis. The cyclin-Cdk complexes act as checkpoints, points at which cell cycle progress can be monitored to determine if the next step can be taken. For example, if DNA is damaged by radiation during G1, a protein called p21 is made. (The p stands for "protein," and the 21 stands for its molecular weight-about 21,000 daltons.) The p21 protein then binds to the two G1 Cdk's, preventing their activation by cyclins. So the cell cycle stops while repairs are made to DNA. The p21 protein itself is targeted for degradation, so that it breaks down after the DNA is repaired, allowing cyclins to bind to the Cdk's and the cell cycle to proceed. What molecules do cyclin-Cdk complexes target for phosphorylation? Some important targets are known. For example, the cyclin B-Cdk1 complex catalyzes the phosphorylation of target proteins that then bind to DNA and initiate chromosome condensation. Phosphorylation of other target proteins results in the disaggregation of the nuclear envelope early in mitosis. Because cancer results from inappropriate cell division, it is not surprising that the cyclin-Cdk controls are disrupted in cancer cells. For example, some fast-growing breast cancers have too much cyclin D, which overstimulates Cdk4 and cell division. As we will describe in Chapter 17, a major protein in normal cells that prevents them from dividing is p53, which leads to inhibition of Cdk's. More than half of all human cancers contain defective p53, resulting in the absence of cell cycle controls.9.2.2 Growth factors can stimulate cells to divideCyclin-Cdk complexes provide an internal control for progress through the cell cycle. But there are situations in the body in which cells that are slowly cycling, or not cycling at all, must be stimulated to divide through external controls, called growth factors. When you cut yourself and bleed, specialized cell fragments called platelets gather at the wound and help initiate blood clotting. The platelets also produce and release a protein, called platelet-derived growth factor, that diffuses to the adjacent cells in the skin and stimulates them to divide and heal the wound. Other growth factors include interleukins, which are made by one type of white blood cell and promote cell division in other cells that are essential for the body's immune system defenses. Erythropoietin, made by the kidney, stimulates the division of bone marrow cells and the production of red blood cells. In addition, many hormones promote division in specific cell types. We will describe the physiological roles of these external mitotic inducers in later chapters, but all growth factors act in a similar way. They bind to their target cells via specialized receptor proteins on the target cell surface. This specific binding triggers events within the target cell that initiate a cell division cycle. Cancer cells often cycle inappropriately because they make their own growth factors, or because they no longer require growth factors to start cycling. 9.3 Eukaryotic Chromosomes 159Most human cells other than eggs and sperm contain two full sets of genetic information, one from the mother and the other from the father. As in prokaryotes, this genetic information consists of molecules of DNA packaged as chromosomes. However, unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have more than one chromosome, and during interphase these chromosomes reside within a membrane-enclosed organelle, the nucleus. The basic unit of the eukaryotic chromosome is a gigantic, linear, double-stranded molecule of DNA complexed with many proteins. During most of the eukaryotic cell cycle, each chromosome contains only one such double-stranded DNA molecule. However, after the DNA molecule replicates during the S phase, the chromosome consists of two joined chromatids, each made up of one double-stranded DNA molecule complexed with proteins. The two chromatids are joined together at a specific small region called the centromere.9.3.1 Chromatin consists of DNA and proteins 160The complex of DNA and proteins that makes up a eukaryotic chromosome is referred to as chromatin. The DNA carries the genetic information; the proteins organize the chromosome physically and regulate the activities of the DNA. By mass, the amount of chromosomal protein is equivalent to that of DNA. Chromatin changes form dramatically during mitosis and meiosis. During interphase, the chromatin is strung out so thinly that the chromosome cannot be seen in the nucleus under the light microscope. But during most of mitosis and meiosis, the chromatin is highly coiled and compacted, so that the chromosome appears as a dense, bulky object. This alternation of forms relates to the function of chromatin during different phases of the cell cycle. Before each mitosis, the genetic material is replicated. Mitosis separates this replicated genetic material into two new nuclei. This separation is easier to accomplish if the DNA is neatly arranged in compact units rather than being tangled up like a plate of spaghetti. During interphase, however, the DNA must direct the activities of the cell. Such functions require that portions of the DNA be unwound and exposed so that it can interact with enzymes.9.3.2 Chromatin proteins organize the DNA in chromosomes 160The DNA of a typical human cell has a total length of 2 meters. Yet the nucleus is only 5 um in diameter. So, although the DNA in an interphase nucleus is "unwound," it is still impressively packed! This packing is achieved largely by proteins associated closely with the chromosomal DNA. Chromosomes contain large quantities of proteins called histones (from the Greek word meaning "web"). There are five classes of histones. All of them have a positive charge at cellular pH levels because of their high content of the basic amino acids lysine and arginine. These positive charges electrostatically attract the negative phosphate groups on DNA. These interactions, as well as interactions among the histones themselves, form beadlike units called nucleosomes. Each nucleosome contains: Eight histone molecules, two each of four of the histone classes, united to form a core or spool; 146 base pairs of DNA, 1.65 turns of it wound around the histone core. Histone H1 (the remaining histone class) on the outside of the DNA, which may clamp it to the histone core. A chromatid is made up of a single DNA molecule running around vast numbers of nucleosomes like beads on a string. Between the nucleosomes stretches a variable amount of non-nucleosomal "linker" DNA. Since this DNA is exposed to the nuclear environment, it is accessible to proteins involved in its duplication and the regulation of its expression, as we will see in Chapter 14. The many nucleosomes of a mitotic chromatid may pack together and coil. During both mitosis and meiosis, the chromatin becomes ever more coiled and condensed, with further folding of the chromatin continuing up to the time at which chromosomes begin to move apart.9.4 Mitosis: Distributing Exact Copies of Genetic Information 160In mitosis, a single nucleus gives rise to two nuclei that are genetically identical to each other and to the parent nucleus. This process ensures the accurate distribution of the eukaryotic cell's multiple chromosomes to the daughter nuclei. In reality, mitosis is a continuous process in which each event flows smoothly into the next. For discussion, however, it is convenient to look at mitosis-the M phase of the cell cycle-as a series of separate events, or subphases: prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.9.4.1 The centrosomes determine the plane of cell division 160Once the commitment to enter mitosis has been made, the cell enters S phase, and DNA is replicated. At the same time, a pair of centrosomes ("central bodies") forms from a single centrosome that lies near the nucleus. This duplication is under the control of cyclin E-Cdk2, whose concentration peaks at the G1-to-S transition. This is the key event in orienting the direction of mitosis. At the G2-to-M transition, the two centrosomes separate from each other, moving to opposite ends of the nuclear envelope. The orientation of the centrosomes determines the plane at which the cell will divide, and therefore the spatial relationship of the two new cells to the parent cell. This relationship may be of little consequence to single free-living cells such as yeasts, but it is important for cells that make up part of a body tissue. In many organisms, each centrosome contains a pair of centrioles. Each pair consists of one "parent" centriole and one smaller "daughter" centriole at right angles to the parent centriole. Their role is not clear, although they do appear to be necessary for centrosome function. Centrioles, if present, replicate during interphase: The two paired centrioles first separate, and then each acts as a "parent" for the formation of a new "daughter" centriole at right angles to it. The centrosomes are the regions of the cell that initiate the formation of microtubules, which will orchestrate chromosomal movement. These regions are not enclosed by membranes and are not visible as discrete objects, but their positions are evident from the arrangement of nearby microtubules. Plant cells lack centrosomes, but distinct microtubule organizing centers at either end of the cell serve the same role.9.4.2 The spindle forms during prophase 161During interphase, only the nuclear envelope, the nucleoli, and a barely discernible tangle of chromatin are visible under the light microscope. The appearance of the nucleus changes as the cell enters prophase-the beginning of mitosis. Each of the two centrosomes serves as a mitotic centerthat organizes microtubules. The two mitotic centers can be thought of as two poles toward which the chromosomes will move. Polar microtubules that form between the mitotic centers make up the developing spindle 1. The spindle serves as a "railroad track" along which the chromosomes will move, as well as a framework keeping the two poles apart. The spindle is actually two half spindles: Each polar microtubule runs from one mitotic center to the middle of the spindle, where it overlaps with polar microtubules of the other half spindle. The polar microtubules are initially unstable, constantly forming and falling apart, until they contact polar microtubules from the other half spindle and become more stable.9.4.3 A prophase chromosome consists of two chromatids 163The chromatin also changes during prophase. The extremely long, thin fibers take on a more orderly form as a result of coiling and compacting. Under the light microscope, each prophase chromosome can be seen to consist of two chromatids held tightly together over much of their length. The two chromatids of a single mitotic chromosome are identical in structure, chemistry, and the hereditary information they carry because of the way in which DNA replicates during the S phase. Within the region of tight binding of the chromatids lies the centromere, which is where chromatids become associated with the microtubules of the spindle. Very late in prophase, specialized three-layered structures called kinetochores develop in the centromere region, one on each chromatid 1. The kinetochores are the sites at which microtubules will attach to the chromatids.9.4.4 Chromosome movements are highly organized 163The next three phases of mitosis-prometaphase, metaphase, and anaphase-are the phases during which chromosomes actually move. During these phases, the centromere holding the two chromatids together separates, and the former chromatids-now called daughter chromosomes-move away from each other in opposite directions. At the beginning of prometaphase, the nuclear lamina disintegrates and the nuclear envelope breaks into small vesicles, allowing the developing spindle to "invade" the nuclear region. The polar microtubules begin attach to chromatids at their kinetochores, at which point they are called kinetochore microtubules. The kinetochore of one chromatid is attached to microtubules coming from one pole, while the kinetochore of its sister chromatid is attached to microtubules emanating from the other pole. During prometaphase, the movement of chromosomes toward the poles is counteracted by two factors: A repulsive force from the poles pushes the chromosomes toward the middle region, or equatorial (metaphase) plate, between the poles; The two chromatids are held together, apparently by proteins called cohesins. So chromosomes during prometaphase appear to move aimlessly back and forth between the the poles and the middle of the spindle. Gradually, the kinetochores approach the equatorial plate. The cell is said to be in metaphase when all the kinetochores arrive at the equatorial plate. Metaphase lasts up to an hour, and is the best time to see the sizes and shapes of chromosomes. Because a microtubule (or a bundle of them) from one of the poles is attached to one of the kinetochores in each chromatid pair, that kinetochore (and chromatid) is oriented toward that pole. By default, the other kinetochore faces the other pole, and becomes attached to that pole's microtubule(s). At the end of metaphase, all of the chromatids separate simultaneously. Two things appear to happen: First, the cohesins break down, and then, an enzyme called DNA topoisomerase II unravels the interconnected DNA's at the centromere.
Separation of the chromatids marks the beginning of anaphase, the phase of mitosis during which the two sister chromatids of each chromosome-now called daughter chromosomes, each containing one double-stranded DNA molecule-move to opposite ends of the spindle. What propels this highly organized mass migration, which takes about 10 minutes, is not clear. Two things seem to move the chromosomes along.First, at the kinetochores are proteins that act as "molecular motors." These proteins, called cytoplasmic dynein, have the ability to hydrolyze ATP to ADP and phosphate, thus releasing energy to move the chromosomes along the microtubules toward the poles.These motor proteins account for about 75 percent of the force of motion. Second, the kinetochore microtubules shorten from the poles, drawing the chromosomes toward them. This accounts for about 25 percent of the motion. During anaphase the poles of the spindle are pushed farther apart, doubling the distance between them. The distance between poles increases because polar microtubules from opposite ends of the spindle contain motor proteins that cause them to slide past each other, pushing the poles apart in much the same way that microtubules slide in cilia and flagella. This polar separation contributes to the separation of one set of daughter chromosomes from the other. The movements of chromosomes are slow, even in cellular terms. At about 1 um per minute, it takes about 10-60 minutes for them to compete their journey to the poles. This is like a human taking 7 million years to cross the United States! This slow speed may ensure that the chromosomes segregate accurately.9.4.5 Nuclei re-form during telophaseWhen the chromosomes stop moving at the end of anaphase, the cell enters telophase. Two sets of chromosomes containing identical DNA, carrying identical sets of hereditary instructions, are now at the opposite ends of the spindle, which begins to break down. The chromosomes begin to uncoil, continuing until they become the diffuse tangle of chromatin that is characteristic of interphase. The nuclear envelopes and nucleoli, which were disaggregated during prophase, coalesce and re-form their respective structures. When these and other changes are complete, telophase-and mitosis-is at an end, and each of the daughter nuclei enters another interphase. Mitosis is beautifully precise. Its result is two nuclei that are identical to each other and to the parent nucleus in chromosomal makeup, and hence in genetic constitution. 9.5 Cytokinesis: The Division of the CytoplasmMitosis refers only to the division of the nucleus. The division of the cell's cytoplasm, which follows mitosis, is accomplished by cytokinesis. Animal cells usually divide by a furrowing of the plasma membrane, as if an invisible thread were tightening between the two poles. The invisible thread is actually microfilaments of actin and myosin located in a ring just beneath the plasma membrane. These two proteins interact to produce a contraction, just as they do in muscles, thus pinching the cell in two. These microfilaments assemble rapidly from actin monomers that are present in the interphase cytoskeleton. Their assembly appears to be under the control of Ca2+ released from storage sites in the center of the cell. Plant cell cytoplasm divides differently, because plants have cell walls. As the spindle breaks down after mitosis, membranous vesicles derived from the Golgi apparatus appear in the equatorial region roughly midway between the two daughter nuclei. Moving along microtubules, these vesicles fuse to form new plasma membrane and contribute their contents to a cell plate, which is the beginning of a new cell wall. Following cytokinesis, both daughter cells contain all the components of a complete cell. A precise distribution of chromosomes is ensured by mitosis. Organelles such as ribosomes, mitochondria, and chloroplasts need not be distributed equally between daughter cells as long as some of each are present in both cells; accordingly, there is no mechanism with precision comparable to that of mitosis to provide for their equal allocation to daughter cells. 9.6 Reproduction: Sexual and Asexual 164The mitotic cell cycle repeats itself. By this process, a single cell can give rise to a vast number of others. Meiosis, on the other hand, results in only four progeny, which usually do not undergo further duplications. These two methods of nuclear and cell division have different reproductive roles.9.6.1  Reproduction by mitosis results in genetic constancy 165A single cell that undergoes mitosis may be an entire organism reproducing itself with each cell cycle, or a cell that divides further to produce a multicellular organism. A multicellular organism, in turn, may be able to reproduce itself by releasing cells derived from mitosis and cytokinesis as a spore, or by having a multicellular piece break away and grow on its own 1. A dividing unicellular organism and a multicellular organism reproducing by releasing cells both provide examples of asexual reproduction, sometimes called vegetative reproduction. This mode of reproduction is based on mitotic division of the nucleus and, accordingly, produces a clone of offspring that are genetically identical to the parent. If there is any variation among the offspring, it is likely to be due to mutations, or changes, in the genetic material. Asexual reproduction is a rapid and effective means of making new individuals, and it is common in nature. Sexual reproduction, which involves meiosis, is very different. In sexual reproduction two parents, each contributing one cell, produce offspring that differ genetically from each parent as well as from each other. This variety among the offspring means that some of them may be better adapted than others to reproduce in a particular environment.9.6.2  Reproduction by meiosis results in genetic diversity 165Sexual reproduction, which combines genetic information form two different cells, fosters genetic diversity. The hallmarks of all sexual life cycles are: There are two parents, each of which provides chromosomes to the offspring in the form of a sex cell, or gamete; Each gamete contains a single set of chromosomes; The two gametes-often identifiable as a female egg and a male sperm-fuse to produce a single cell, the zygote, or fertilized egg. This fusion is called fertilization. The zygote thus contains two sets of chromosomes.In each recognizable pair of chromosomes, one chromosome comes from each of two parents. The members of such a homologous pair are similar in size and appearance (except for the so-called sex chromosomes found in some species; the two members of these pairs are different, and their differences determine the sex of the organism, as we will see in Chapter 1. The two chromosomes (the homologs) of a homologous pair bear corresponding, though generally not identical, types of genetic information.Haploid cells contain only one homolog from each pair of chromosomes. The number of chromosomes in such a single set is denoted by n. When haploid gametes fuse in fertilization, the resulting zygote has two homologs of each type. It is thus said to be diploid, denoted 2n. Sexual life cycles exhibit different patterns of development after zygote formation. In haplontic organisms, such as protists and many fungi, the mature organism is haploid. The zygote undergoes a reduction division-meiosis-to produce haploid cells, or spores. These spores then form the new organism by mitosis of haploid cells, which may be single-celled or multicellular. Gametes are then produced by this organism by mitosis. So in haplontic organisms, the zygote is the only diploid cell in the life cycle. At the other extreme are diplontic organisms, which include animals and some plants. Here, the gametes are the only haploid cells, and the organism itself is diploid. Gametes are formed by meiosis, and the formation of the organism involves mitosis of diploid cells.In the middle are organisms that have an alternation of haploid and diploid generations. Most plants fall into this category. Here, the zygote divides by mitosis of diploid cells into a diploid organism. Meiosis does not give rise to gametes, but instead to haploid spores that divide by mitosis to form an alternate, haploid life stage. It is this haploid organism that forms gametes by mitosis, and after fertilization the cycle begins anew. We will look at all of these life cycles in greater detail in subsequent chapters. The essence of sexual reproduction is the random selection of half of a parent's diploid chromosome set to make a haploid gamete, followed by the fusion of two such haploid gametes to produce a diploid cell that contains genetic information from both gametes. Both of these steps contribute to a shuffling of genetic information in the population, so no two individuals have exactly the same genetic constitution. The diversity provided by sexual reproduction opens up enormous opportunities for evolution.9.6.3  The number, shapes, and sizes of the metaphase chromosomes constitute the karyotype 167When nuclei are in metaphase of mitosis, it is often possible to count and characterize the individual chromosomes. This is a relatively simple process in some organisms, thanks to techniques that can capture cells in metaphase and spread out the chromosomes. A photograph of the entire set of chromosomes can then be made, and the images of the individual chromosomes can be placed in an orderly arrangement. Such a rearranged photograph reveals the number, shapes, and sizes of chromosomes in a cell, which together constitute its karyotype 1. Individual chromosomes can be recognized by their lengths, the positions of their centromeres, and characteristic banding when they are stained and observed at high magnification. When the cell is diploid, the karyotype consists of homologous pairs of chromosomes-23 pairs for a total of 46 chromosomes in humans, and greater or smaller numbers of pairs in other diploid species. There is no simple relationship between the size of an organism and its chromosome number (Table 9..9.7  Meiosis: A Pair of Nuclear Divisions 167Meiosis consists of two nuclear divisions that reduce the number of chromosomes to the haploid number in preparation for sexual reproduction. Although the nucleus divides twice during meiosis, the DNA is replicated only once. To understand the process of meiosis and its specific details, it is useful to keep in mind the overall functions of meiosis: To reduce the chromosome number from diploid to haploid; To ensure that each of the haploid products has a complete set of chromosomes; To promote genetic diversity among the products. Two unique features characterize the first meiotic division, meiosis I. The first is that homologous chromosomes pair along their entire lengths. This process, called synapsis, lasts from prophase to the end of metaphase. The second is that after this metaphase, the homologous chromosomes separate. The individual chromosomes, each consisting of two joined chromatids, remain intact until the end of the metaphase of meiosis II, the second meiotic division. In the discussion that follows.9.7.1 The first meiotic division reduces the chromosome number 170Like mitosis, meiosis I is preceded by an interphase with an S phase during which each chromosome is replicated. As a result, each chromosome consists of two sister chromatids. Meiosis I begins with a long prophase I, during which the chromosomes change markedly. A key change is that homologous chromosomes join together, or synapse. By the time they can be clearly seen under the light microscope, the two homologs are already tightly joined. This joining begins at the centromeres and is mediated by a recognition of homologous DNA sequences on homologous chromosomes. In addition, a special group of proteins may form a scaffold called the synaptonemal complex that runs lengthwise along the homologous chromosomes and appears to join them together. The four chromatids of each pair of homologous chromosomes form a tetrad, or bivalent. To summarize: A tetrad is four chromatids, two each from two homologous chromosomes. For example, there are 46 chromosomes in a human diploid cell, so there are 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes, each with two chromatids, for a total of 92 chromatids during prophase I. In other words, there are 23 tetrads, each containing two homologous chromosomes and four chromatids.Throughout prophase I and metaphase I, the chromatin continues to coil and compact progressively, so the chromosomes appear ever thicker. At a certain point, the homologous chromosomes seem to repel each other, especially near the centromeres, but they are held together by physical attachments. Regions having these attachments take on an X-shaped appearance and are called chiasmata (from the Greek word "chiasma," meaning "cross". A chiasma reflects an exchange of material between chromatids on homologous chromosomes-what geneticists call crossing over 1. The chromosomes begin exchanging material shortly after synapsis begins, but the chiasmata do not become visible until later, when the homologs are repelling each other. Crossing over increases the genetic variation among the products of meiosis. We will have a great deal to say about crossing over and its genetic consequences in the coming chapters.There seems to be plenty of time for the complicated events of prophase I to occur. Whereas mitotic prophase is usually measured in minutes, and all of mitosis seldom takes more than an hour or two, meiosis can take much longer. In human males, the cells in the testis that undergo meiosis take about a week for prophase I and about a month for the entire meiotic cycle. In the cells that will become eggs, prophase I begins long before a woman's birth, during early fetal development, and ends as much as decades later, during the monthly ovarian cycle.Prophase I is followed by prometaphase I, during which the nuclear envelope and the nucleoli disappear. A spindle forms, and microtubules become attached to the kinetochores of the chromosomes. In meiosis I, there is only one kinetochore per chromosome, not one per chromatid as in mitosis. Thus, the entire chromosome, consisting of two chromatids, will migrate to one pole in the meiotic cell.By metaphase I, all the chromosomal kinetochores have become connected to polar microtubules, and all the chromosomes have moved to the equatorial plate. Until this point, they have been held together by chiasmata.The homologous chromosomes separate in anaphase I, when individual chromosomes, each still consisting of two chromatids, are pulled to the poles, with one homolog of a pair going to one pole and the other homolog going to the opposite pole. (Note that this process differs from the separation of chromatids during mitotic anaphase.) Each of the two daughter nuclei from this division is haploid; that is, it contains only one set of chromosomes, not the two sets that were present in the original diploid nucleus. However, because they consist of two chromatids rather than just one, each of these chromosomes has twice the mass that a chromosome at the end of a mitotic division has.In some species, but not in others, there is a telophase I, with the reappearance of nuclear envelopes and so forth. When there is a telophase I, it is followed by an interphase, called interkinesis, similar to the mitotic interphase. During interkinesis the chromatin is partially uncoiled; however, there is no replication of the genetic material, because each chromosome already consists of two chromatids. Furthermore, the sister chromatids in interkinesis are generally not genetically identical, because crossing over in prophase I has reshuffled genetic material between maternal and paternal chromosomes.9.7.2 The second meiotic division separates the chromatids 171Meiosis II is similar to mitosis in many ways. In each nucleus produced by meiosis I, the chromosomes line up at equatorial plates in metaphase II, the chromatids-each of which has a centromere-separate, and new daughter chromosomes move to the poles in anaphase II. The three major differences between meiosis II and mitosis are: DNA replicates before mitosis, but not before meiosis II. In mitosis, the sister chromatids that make up a given chromosome are identical; in meiosis II, they differ over part of their length if they participated in crossing over during prophase of meiosis I. The number of chromosomes on the equatorial plate of each of the two nuclei in meiosis II is half the number in the single mitotic nucleus. The result of meiosis is four nuclei; each nucleus is haploid and has a single set of chromosomes that differs from other such sets in its exact genetic composition. The differences, to repeat a very important point, result from crossing over during prophase I and from the segregation of homologous chromosomes during anaphase I.9.7.3 Meiosis leads to genetic diversity 172What are the consequences of the synapsis and separation of homologous chromosomes during meiosis? In mitosis, each chromosome behaves independently of its homolog; its two chromatids are sent to opposite poles at anaphase. If we start a mitotic division with x chromosomes, we end up with x chromosomes in each daughter nucleus, and each chromosome consists of one chromatid. In meiosis, things are very different. In meiosis, synapsis organizes things so that chromosomes of maternal origin pair with their paternal homologs. Then their separation during meiotic anaphase I ensures that each pole receives one member of each homologous pair. (Remember that each chromosome still consists of two chromatids.) For example, at the end of meiosis I in humans, each daughter nucleus contains 23 of the original 46 chromosomes. In this way, the chromosome number is decreased from diploid to haploid. Furthermore, meiosis I guarantees that each daughter nucleus gets one full set of chromosomes, for it must have one of each homologous pair. The products of meiosis I are genetically diverse for two reasons. First, synapsis during prophase I allows the maternal chromosome to interact with the paternal one; after crossing over, the recombinant chromatids contain some genetic material from each chromosome. Second, which member of a homologous pair goes to which daughter cell at anaphase I is a matter of pure chance. For example, if there are two pairs of chromosomes in the diploid parent nucleus, a particular daughter nucleus could get paternal chromosome 1 and maternal chromosome 2, or paternal 2 and maternal 1, or both maternals, or both paternals. It all depends on the way in which the homologous pairs line up at metaphase I. Note that of the four possible chromosome combinations just described, two produce daughter nuclei that are the same as one of the parental types (except for any material exchanged by crossing over). The greater the number of chromosomes, the less probable that the original parental combinations will be reestablished, and the greater the potential for genetic diversity. Most species of diploid organisms do, indeed, have more than two pairs. In humans, with 23 chromosome pairs, 223 different combinations can be produced.9.8 Meiotic Errors 172A pair of homologous chromosomes may fail to separate during meiosis I, or sister chromatids may fail to separate during meiosis II or during mitosis. This phenomenon is called nondisjunction, and it results in the production of aneuploid cells 1. Aneuploidy is a condition in which one or more chromosomes or pieces of chromosomes are either lacking or present in excess.9.8.1 Aneuploidy can give rise to genetic abnormalities 172One reason for nondisjunction may be a lack of chiasmata. Recall that these structures, formed during prophase I, hold the two homologous chromosomes together into metaphase I. This ensures that one homolog will face one pole and the other homolog the other pole. Without this "glue," the two homologs line up randomly at metaphase I, just like chromosomes during mitosis, and there is a 50 percent chance that both will go to the same pole. If, for example, the chromosome 21 pair fails to separate during the formation of a human egg (and thus both members of the pair go to one pole during anaphase I), the resulting egg will contain either two of chromosome 21 or none at all. If an egg with two of these chromosomes is fertilized by a normal sperm, the resulting zygote will have three copies of the chromosome: it will be trisomic for chromosome 21. A child with an extra chromosome 21 demonstrates the symptoms of Down syndrome: impaired intelligence; characteristic abnormalities of the hands, tongue, and eyelids; and an increased susceptibility to cardiac abnormalities and diseases such as leukemia. Other abnormal events can also lead to aneuploidy. In a process called translocation, a piece of a chromosome may break away and become attached to another chromosome. For example, a particular large part of one chromosome 21 may be translocated to another chromosome. Individuals who inherit this translocated piece along with two normal chromosomes 21 will have Down syndrome. Other human disorders result from particular chromosomal abnormalities. Sex chromosome aneuploidy causes disorders such as Turner syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome, discussed in Chapter 10 in connection with sex determination. The loss of a portion of chromosome 5 results in cri du chat (French for "cat's cry") syndrome, so named because an afflicted infant's cry sounds like that of a cat. Symptoms of this syndrome include severe mental retardation.Trisomies (and the corresponding monosomies) are surprisingly common in human zygotes, but most of the embryos that develop from such zygotes do not survive to birth. Trisomies for chromosomes 13, 15, and 18 greatly reduce the probability that an embryo will survive to birth, and virtually all infants who are born with such trisomies die before the age of 1 year. Trisomies and monosomies for other chromosomes are lethal to the embryo. At least one-fifth of all recognized pregnancies spontaneously terminate during the first two months, largely because of such trisomies and monosomies. (The actual proportion of spontaneously terminated pregnancies is certainly higher, because the earliest ones often go unrecognized.)9.8.2 Polyploids can have difficulty in cell division 173Both diploid and haploid nuclei divide by mitosis. Multicellular diploid and multicellular haploid individuals develop from single-celled beginnings by mitotic divisions. Likewise, mitosis may proceed in diploid organisms even when a chromosome from one of the haploid sets is missing or when there is an extra copy of one of the chromosomes (as in Down syndrome). Under some circumstances, triploid (3n), tetraploid (4n), and higher-order polyploid nuclei may form. Each of these ploidy levels represents an increase in the number of complete sets of chromosomes present. If, by accident, the nucleus has one or more extra full sets of chromosomes-that is, if it is triploid, tetraploid, or of still higher ploidy-this abnormally high ploidy in itself does not prevent mitosis. In mitosis, each chromosome behaves independently of the others. In meiosis, by contrast, chromosomes synapse to begin division. If even one chromosome has no homolog, anaphase I cannot send representatives of that chromosome to both poles. A diploid nucleus can undergo normal meiosis; a haploid one cannot. A tetraploid nucleus has an even number of each kind of chromosome, so each chromosome can pair with its homolog. But a triploid nucleus cannot undergo normal meiosis, because one-third of the chromosomes would lack partners. This limitation has important consequences for the fertility of triploid, tetraploid, and other chromosomally unusual organisms that may be produced by plant breeding or by natural accidents. Modern bread wheat plants are hexaploids, the result of the accidental crossing of three different grasses, each having its own diploid set of 14 chromosomes. 9.9 Cell Death 173As we mentioned at the start of this chapter, an essential role of cell division in complex eukaryotes is to replace cells that die. In humans, billions of cells die each day, mainly in the blood and the epithelia lining organs such as the intestine. Cells die in one of two ways. The first, necrosis, occurs when cells either are damaged by poisons or are starved of essential nutrients. These cells usually swell up and burst, releasing their contents into the extracellular environment. This often results in inflammation. The scab that forms around a wound is a familiar example of necrotic tissue. More typically, cell death in an organism is due to apoptosis (from the Greek word meaning "falling off"). Apoptosis is a prescribed series of events that constitute genetically programmed cell death. Why would a cell initiate apoptosis, which is essentially "cell suicide"? One reason is that the cell in question is no longer needed by the organism. For example, before birth, a human fetus has weblike hands, with connective tissue between the fingers. As development proceeds, this unneeded tissue disappears as its cells undergo apoptosis 1. A second reason for apoptosis is that the longer cells live, the more prone they are to damage that could lead to cancer. This is especially true of cells in the blood and intestine, which are exposed to high levels of toxic substances. In these cases, cells "sacrifice their lives for the good of the organism." Such cells normally die after only days or weeks.Like the cell division cycle, the cell death cycle has signals controlling its progress. These include the lack of a mitotic signal, such as a growth factor, and recognition of DNA damage. As we will see in Chapter 17, many of the drugs used to treat diseases of cell proliferation such as cancer work via these signals. The events of apoptosis are very similar in most organisms. The cell becomes isolated from its neighbors, chops up its chromatin into nucleosome-sized pieces, and then fragments itself. In a remarkable example of the economy of nature, the surrounding living cells ingest the remains of the dead cell. The genetic signals that lead to apoptosis are also common to many organisms.10 Genetics: Mendel and BeyondIn the Middle Eastern desert, 1,800 years ago, a rabbi faced a serious dilemma. A Jewish woman had given birth to a son. As required by laws first set down by God's commandment to Abraham almost 2,000 years previously and reiterated later by Moses, the mother brought her 8-day-old son to the rabbi for ritual penile circumcision. The rabbi knew that the woman's two previous sons had bled to death when their foreskins were cut. Yet the Biblical commandment remained: The boy could not be counted among those with whom God had made His solemn covenant unless he was circumcised. After consultation with other rabbis, it was decided to exempt this, the third son. Almost one thousand years later, in the twelfth century, the physician and biblical commentator Moses Maimonides reviewed this and numerous other cases in the rabbinical literature, and stated that in such instances the third son should not be circumcised. Furthermore, the ban should apply whether the son was "from her first husband or from her second husband." The bleeding disorder, he reasoned, was clearly carried by the mother and passed on to her sons. Knowing nothing of our modern vision of genetics, these rabbis linked a human disease (which turns out to be hemophilia A) to a pattern of inheritance (which we know as sex linkage). Only in the past several decades have the precise biochemical nature of hemophilia A and its genetic determination been worked out. How do we account for, and predict, such patterns of inheritance? In this chapter, we will discuss how the units of inheritance, called genes, are transmitted from generation to generation of plants and animals, and show how many of the rules that govern genetics can be explained by the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis. We will also describe the interactions of genes with one another and with the environment, and the consequences of the fact that genes occupy specific positions on chromosomes. 10.1 The Foundations of Genetics 176Much of the early study of biological inheritance was done with plants and animals of economic importance. Records show that people were deliberately cross-breeding date palm trees and horses as early as 5,000 years ago. By the early 1800s, plant breeding was widespread, especially with ornamental flowers such as tulips. Half a century later, in 1866, Gregor Mendel used the knowledge of plant reproduction to design and conduct experiments on inheritance. Although his published results were neglected by scientists for 40 years, they ultimately became the foundation for the science of genetics.10.1.1 Plant breeders showed that both parents contribute equally to inheritance 176Plants are easily grown in large quantities, many produce large numbers of offspring (in the form of seeds), and many have relatively short generation times. In most plant species, the same individuals have both male and female reproductive organs, permitting each plant to reproduce as a male, as a female, or as both. Best of all, it is often easy to control which individuals mate. Some discoveries that Mendel found useful in his studies had been made in the late eighteenth century by a German botanist, Josef Gottlieb Kšlreuter. Kšlreuter studied the offspring of reciprocal crosses between plants and showed that the two parents contributed equally to the characteristics inherited by their offspring. In a reciprocal cross, plants are crossed with (mated with) each other in opposite directions. For example, in one crosse, males that have white flowers are mated with females that have red flowers, while in a complementary cross, red-flowered males and white-flowered females are the parents. In Kšlreuter's experience, such reciprocal crosses always gave identical results.Although the concept of equal parental contributions was an important discovery, the nature of what exactly the parents were contributing-the units of inheritance-remained unknown. Laws of inheritance proposed at the time favored the concept of blending. If a plant that had one form of a characteristic (say, red flowers) was crossed with one that had a different form of that characteristic (blue flowers), the offspring would be a blended combination of the two parents (purple flowers). According to the blending concept, it was thought that once heritable elements were combined, they could not be separated again (like combined inks). The red and blue genetic determinants were thought to be forever blended into the new purple one. Then, about a century after Kšlreuter completed his work, Mendel began his.10.1.2 Mendel's discoveries were overlooked for decades 177Gregor Mendel was an Austrian monk, not an academic scientist, but he was qualified to undertake scientific investigations. Although in 1850 he had failed an examination for a teaching certificate in natural science, he later undertook intensive studies in physics, chemistry, mathematics, and various aspects of biology at the University of Vienna. His work in physics and mathematics probably led him to apply experimental and quantitative methods to the study of heredity-and these were the key ingredients in his success. Mendel worked out the basic principles of inheritance in plants and animals over a period of about nine years. His work culminated in a public lecture in 1865 and a detailed written account published in 1866. Mendel's paper appeared in a journal that was received by 120 libraries, and he sent reprinted copies (of which he had obtained 4 to several distinguished scholars. However, his theory was not accepted. In fact, it was ignored. The chief difficulty was that the most prominent biologists of Mendel's time were not in the habit of thinking in mathematical terms, even the simple terms used by Mendel. Even Charles Darwin, whose theory of evolution by natural selection depended on genetic variation among individuals failed to understand the significance of Mendel's findings. In fact, Darwin performed breeding experiments like Mendel's on snapdragons and got data similar to Mendel's, but missed the point, still relying on the concept of blending. In addition, Mendel had little credibility as a biologist; indeed, his lowest grades were in biology! Whatever the reasons, Mendel's pioneering paper had no discernible influence on the scientific world for more than 30 years. Then, in 1900, Mendel's discoveries burst into prominence as a result of independent experiments by three plant geneticists: the Dutch Hugo de Vries, the German Karl Correns, and the Austrian Erich von Tschermak. Each of these scientists carried out crossing experiments and obtained quantitative data about the progeny; each published his principal findings in 1900; each cited Mendel's 1866 paper. By that time, meiosis had been observed and described. At last the time was ripe for biologists to appreciate the significance of what these four geneticists had discovered. 10.2 Mendel's Experiments and the Laws of Inheritance 178That Mendel was able to make his discoveries before the discovery of meiosis was due in part to the methods of experimentation he used. Mendel's work is a fine example of preparation, execution, and interpretation. Let's see how he approached each of these steps.10.2.1 Mendel devised a careful research plan 179Mendel chose the garden pea for his studies because of its ease of cultivation, the feasibility of controlled pollination , and the availability of varieties with differing traits. He controlled pollination, and thus fertilization, of his parent plants by manually moving pollen from one plant to another. Thus, he knew the parentage of the offspring in his experiments. If untouched, the pea plants Mendel studied naturally self-pollinate-that is, the female organs of flowers receive pollen from the male organs of the same flowers-and he made use of this natural phenomenon in some of his experiments. Mendel began by examining different varieties of peas in a search for heritable characters and traits suitable for study. A character is a feature such as flower color; a trait is a particular form of a character, such as white flowers. A heritable character trait is one that is passed from parent to offspring. Mendel looked for characters that had well-defined, contrasting alternative traits, such as purple flowers versus white flowers, that were true-breeding.To be considered true-breeding, the observed trait must be the only form present for many generations. In other words, peas with white flowers, when crossed with one another, would have to give rise only to progeny with white flowers for many generations; tall plants bred to tall plants would have to produce only tall progeny. Mendel isolated each of his true-breeding strains by repeated inbreeding (done by crossing of sibling plants that were seemingly identical, or allowing individuals to self-pollinate) and selection. In most of his work, Mendel concentrated on the seven pairs of contrasting traits. Before performing any given cross, he made sure that each potential parent was from a true-breeding strain-an essential point in his analysis of his experimental results. Mendel then collected pollen from one parental strain and placed it onto the stigma (female organ) of flowers of the other strain. The plants providing and receiving the pollen were the parental generation, designated P. In due course, seeds formed and were planted. The resulting new plants constituted the first filial generation, F1. Mendel and his assistants examined each F1 plant to see which traits it bore and then recorded the number of F1 plants expressing each trait. In some experiments the F1 plants were allowed to self-pollinate and produce a second filial generation, or F2. Again, each F2 plant was characterized and counted. In sum, Mendel devised a well-organized plan of research, pursued it faithfully and carefully, recorded great amounts of quantitative data, and analyzed the numbers he recorded to explain the relative proportions of the different kinds of progeny. His 1866 paper stands to this day as a model of clarity. His results and the conclusions to which they led are the subject of the next few sections.10.2.2 Mendel's Experiment 1 examined a monohybrid cross 179"Experiment 1" in Mendel's paper involved a monohybrid cross-one in which each parent pea plant was true-breeding for a given character, but in this case each displayed a different form of that character (a different trait). He took pollen from plants of a true-breeding strain with wrinkled seeds and placed it on the stigmas of flowers of a true-breeding, spherical-seeded strain. He also performed the reciprocal cross, placing pollen from the spherical-seeded strain on the stigmas of flowers of the wrinkled-seeded strain. In both cases, all the F1 seeds that were produced were spherical-it was as if the wrinkled trait had disappeared completely. The following spring Mendel grew 253 F1 plants from these spherical seeds, each of which was allowed to self-pollinate-this was the monohybrid cross-to produce F2 seeds. In all, there were 7,324 F2 seeds, of which 5,474 were spherical and 1,850 wrinkled. Mendel concluded that the spherical seed trait was dominant: In the F1 generation, it was always expressed rather than the wrinkled seed trait, which he called recessive. In each of the other six pairs of traits Mendel studied, one proved to be dominant over the other. When he crossed plants differing in one of these traits, only one of each pair of traits was evident in the F1 generation. However, the trait that was not seen in the F1 reappeared in the F2. Of most importance, the ratio of the two traits in the F2 generation was always the same-approximately 3:1. That is, three-fourths of the F2 showed the dominant trait and one-fourth showed the recessive trait. In Mendel's Experiment 1, the ratio was 5,474:1,850 = 2.96:1. The reciprocal cross in the parental generation gave a similar outcome in the F2.By themselves, the results from Experiment 1 disproved the widely held belief that inheritance is a blending phenomenon. According to the blending theory, Mendel's F1 seeds should have had an appearance intermediate between those of the two parents-in other words, they should have been slightly wrinkled. Furthermore, the blending theory offered no explanation for the reappearance of the wrinkled trait in the F2 seeds after its apparent absence in the F1 seeds.
Mendel proposed that the units responsible for the inheritance of specific traits are present as discrete particles that occur in pairs and segregate (separate) from one another during the formation of gametes. According to this particulate theory, the units of inheritance retain their integrity in the presence of other units. The particulate theory is a sharp contrast to the concept of blending, in which the units of inheritance were believed to lose their identities when mixed together. As he wrestled mathematically with his data, Mendel reached the conclusion that each pea plant has two units of inheritance for each character, one from each parent. During the production of gametes, only one of these paired units for a given character is given to a gamete. Hence each gamete contains one unit, and the resulting zygote contains two, because it was produced by the fusion of two gametes. This conclusion is the core of Mendel's model of inheritance. Mendel's unit of inheritance is now called a gene. Mendel reasoned that in Experiment 1, the spherical-seeded parent had a pair of genes of the same type, which we will call S, and the parent with wrinkled seeds had two s genes. The SS parent produced gametes each containing a single S, and the ss parent produced gametes each with a single s. Each member of the F1 generation had an S from one parent and an s from the other; an F1 could thus be described as Ss. We say that S is dominant over s because the s trait is not evident when both forms of the gene are present. The different forms of a gene (S and s in this case) are called alleles. Individuals that are true-breeding for a trait contain two copies of the same allele. For example, all the individuals in a population of a strain of true-breeding peas with wrinkled seeds must have the allele pair ss; if S were present, the plants would produce spherical seeds. We say that the individuals that produce wrinkled seeds are homozygous for the allele s, meaning that they have two copies of the same allele (ss). Some peas with spherical seeds-the ones with the genotype SS-are also homozygous. However, not all plants with spherical seeds have the SS genotype. Some spherical-seeded plants, like Mendel's F1, are heterozygous: They have two different alleles of the gene in question (in this case, Ss). To illustrate these terms with a more complex example, one in which there are three gene pairs, an individual with the genotype AABbcc is homozygous for the A and C genes-because it has two A alleles and two c alleles-but heterozygous for the B gene because it contains the B and b alleles. An individual that is homozygous for a character is sometimes called a homozygote; a heterozygote is heterozygous for the character in question. The physical appearance of an organism is its phenotype. Mendel correctly supposed the phenotype to be the result of the genotype, or genetic constitution, of the organism showing the phenotype. In Experiment 1 we are dealing with two phenotypes (spherical seeds and wrinkled seeds). As we will see in the next section, the F2 generation contains these two phenotypes and three genotypes. The wrinkled-seed phenotype is produced only by the genotype ss, whereas the spherical-seed phenotype may be produced by the genotypes SS or Ss.10.2.3 Mendel's first law says that alleles segregate 180How does Mendel's model of inheritance explain the composition of the F2 generation in Experiment 1? Consider first the F1, which has the spherical-seeded phenotype and the Ss genotype. According to Mendel's model, when any individual produces gametes, the alleles separate, so that each gamete receives only one member of the pair of alleles. This is Mendel's first law, the law of segregation. In Experiment 1, half the gametes produced by the F1 contained the S allele and half the s allele. During self-pollination, the random combination of gametes produces the F2 generation. Three different F2 genotypes are possible: SS, Ss (which is the same thing as sS), and ss. Our quantitative way of looking at things may lead us to wonder what proportions of these genotypes we might expect to observe in the F2 progeny. The expected frequencies of these three genotypes may be determined by using the Punnett square, devised in 1905 by the British geneticist Reginald Crundall Punnett. The Punnett square is a device that reminds us to consider all possible combinations of gametes. The square looks like this: It is a simple grid with all possible sperm genotypes shown across one side and all possible egg genotypes along another side. To complete the grid, we fill in each square with the corresponding sperm genotype and egg genotype, giving the diploid genotype of one member of the F2 generation. For example, to fill the rightmost square, we put in the S from the egg (female gamete) and the s from the sperm (male gamete), yielding Ss. Examination of the Punnett square reveals that self-pollination of the F1 genotype Ss will give the three F2 genotypes in the expected ratio 1 SS:2 Ss:1 ss. Because S is dominant and s recessive, only two phenotypes result, in the ratio of 3 spherical (SS and Ss) to 1 wrinkled (ss), just as Mendel observed. Mendel did not live to see his theory placed on a sound physical footing based on chromosomes and DNA. Genes are now known to be regions of the DNA molecules in chromosomes. More specifically, a gene is a portion of the DNA that resides at a particular site, called a locus (plural loci), within the chromosome and that encodes a particular function. Mendel arrived at his law of segregation with no knowledge of chromosomes or meiosis, but today we can picture the different alleles of a gene segregating as chromosomes separate into gametes in meiosis I.10.2.4 Mendel verified his hypothesis by performing a test cross 181The test cross is a way to test whether a given individual showing a dominant trait is homozygous or heterozygous. In a test cross, the individual in question is crossed with an individual known to be homozygous for the recessive trait-an easy individual to identify, because in order to have the recessive phenotype it must be homozygous for the recessive trait. For the pea gene that we have been considering, the recessive homozygote used for the test cross is ss. The individual being tested may be described initially as S- because we do not yet know the identity of the second allele. There are two possible results: If the individual being tested is homozygous dominant (SS), all offspring of the test cross will be Ss and show the dominant trait (spherical seeds). If the individual being tested is heterozygous (Ss), then approximately half of the offspring of the test cross will show the dominant trait (Ss), but the other half will be homozygous for, and will show, the recessive trait (ss). These were exactly the results that Mendel obtained; thus Mendel's model accurately predicts the results of such test crosses.10.2.5 Mendel's second law says that alleles of different genes assort independently  182What happens if two parents that differ at two or more loci are crossed? Consider an organism heterozygous for twogenes, Ss and Yy, in which S and Y came from its mother and s and y came from its father. When this organism makes gametes, do the alleles of maternal origin (S and Y) go together to one gamete and those of paternal origin (s and y) to another gamete? Or can a single gamete receive one maternal and one paternal allele, S and y (or s and Y)? To answer these questions, Mendel performed a series of dihybrid crosses, crosses made between parents that are identical double heterozygotes. In these experiments, Mendel began with peas that differed for two characters of the seeds: seed shape and seed color. One true-breeding strain produced only spherical, yellow seeds (SSYY) and the other strain produced only wrinkled, green ones (ssyy). A cross between these two strains produced an F1 generation in which all the plants were SsYy. Because the S and Y alleles are dominant, these F1 seeds were all yellow and spherical. Mendel continued this experiment to the next generation-the dihybrid cross. There are two ways in which these doubly heterozygous plants might produce gametes, as Mendel saw it. (Remember that he had never heard of chromosomes or meiosis.) First, if the alleles maintain the associations they had in the original parents (that is, if they are linked), then the F1 plants should produce two types of gametes (SY and sy), and the F2 progeny resulting from self-pollination of the F1 plants should consist of three times as many plants bearing spherical, yellow seeds as ones with wrinkled, green seeds. Were such results to be obtained, there might be no reason to suppose that seed shape and seed color were regulated by two different genes, because spherical seeds would always be yellow, and wrinkled ones always green. The second possibility is that the segregation of S from s is independent of the segregation of Y from y during the production of gametes (that is, that they are unlinked). In this case, four kinds of gametes should be produced, in equal numbers: SY, Sy, sY, and sy. When these gametes combine at random, they should produce an F2 of nine different genotypes. The progeny could have any of three possible genotypes for shape (SS, Ss, or ss) and any of three possible genotypes for color (YY, Yy, or yy). The combined nine genotypes should produce just four phenotypes (spherical yellow, spherical green, wrinkled yellow, wrinkled green). By using a Punnett square, we can show that these four phenotypes would be expected to occur in a ratio of 9:3:3:1. Mendel's dihybrid crosses produced the results predicted by the second possibility. Four different phenotypes appeared in the F2 in a ratio of about 9:3:3:1. The parental traits appeared in new combinations of two of the phenotypic classes (spherical green and wrinkled yellow). Such new combinations are called recombinant phenotypes. These results led Mendel to the formulation of what is now known as Mendel's second law: Alleles of different genes assort independently of one another during gamete formation. This law of independent assortment is not as universal as the law of segregation, because it applies to genes that lie on separate chromosomes, but not necessarily to those that lie on the same chromosome. However, it is correct to say that chromosomes segregate independently during the formation of gametes.10.2.6 Punnett squares or probability calculations: A choice of methods 183many people find it easiest to solve genetics problems using probability calculations, perhaps because the basic underlying considerations are familiar. When we flip a coin, for example, we expect that it has an equal probability of landing "heads" or "tails." For a given toss of a fair coin, the probability of heads is independent of what happened in all the previous tosses. A run of ten straight heads implies nothing about the next toss. No "law of averages" increases the likelihood that the next toss will come up tails, and no "momentum" makes an eleventh occurrence of heads any more likely. On the eleventh toss, the odds are still 50:50. The basic conventions of probability are simple: If an event is absolutely certain to happen, its probability is 1. If it cannot happen, its probability is 0. Otherwise, its probability lies between 0 and 1. A coin toss results in heads approximately half the time, and the probability of heads is 1/2-as is the probability of tails. If two coins (a penny and a dime, say) are tossed, each acts independently of the other. What, then, is the probability of both coins coming up heads? Half the time, the penny comes up heads; of that fraction, half the time the dime also comes up heads. Therefore, the joint probability of two heads is half of one-half, or 1/2 ; 1/2 = 1/4. To find the joint probability of independent events, then, the general rule is to multiply the probabilities of the individual events. To apply a probabilistic approach to genetics problems, we need only deal with gamete formation and random fertilization instead of coin tosses. A homozygote can produce only one type of gamete, so, for example, an SS individual has a probability equal to 1 of producing gametes with the genotype S. The heterozygote Ss produces S gametes with a probability of 1/2, and s gametes with a probability of 1/2. They are obtained by self-pollination of F1 plants of genotype Ss. The probability that an F2 plant will have the genotype SS must be 1/2 ; 1/2 = 1/4 because there is a 50:50 chance that the sperm will have the genotype S, and this chance is independent of the 50:50 chance that the egg will have the genotype S. Similarly, the probability of ss offspring is 1/2 ; 1/2 = 1/4. The probability of an F2 plant getting S from the sperm and s from the egg is also 1/4, but remember that the same genotype can also result from s in the sperm and S in the egg, with a probability of 1/4. The probability of an event that can occur in two or more different ways is the sum of the individual probabilities of those ways. Thus the probability that an F2 plant will be a heterozygote is equal to the sum of the probabilities of each way of forming a heterozygote: 1/4 + 1/4 = 1/2. The three genotypes are therefore expected in the ratio 1/4 SS:1/2 Ss:1/4 ss-hence the 1:2:1 ratio of genotypes and the 3:1 ratio of phenotypes.If F1 plants heterozygous for two independent characters self-pollinate, the resulting F2 plants express four different phenotypes. The proportions of these phenotypes are easily determined by probabilities. Let's see how this works for the experiment. The probability that a seed will be spherical is 3/4, as we have just seen. By the same reasoning, the probability that a seed will be yellow is also 3/4. The two characters are determined by separate genes and are independent of each other, so the joint probability that a seed will be both spherical and yellow is 3/4 ; 3/4 = 9/16. For the wrinkled, yellow members of the F2 generation, the probability of being yellow is again 3/4; the probability of being wrinkled is 1/2 ; 1/2 = 1/4. The joint probability that a seed will be both wrinkled and yellow, then, is 3/4 ; 1/4 = 3/16. The same probability applies, for similar reasons, to the spherical, green F2 seeds. Finally, the probability that F2 seeds will be both wrinkled and green must be 1/4 ; 1/4 = 1/16. Looking at all four phenotypes, we see they are expected in the ratio of 9:3:3:1. Probability calculations and Punnett squares give the same results. Learn to do genetics problems both ways, and then decide which method you prefer.

10.2.7 Mendel's laws can be observed in human pedigrees 185A few years after Mendel's work was uncovered by plant breeders, Mendelian inheritance was found in humans. By now, patterns of over 2,500 inherited human characteristics have been described. Mendel worked out the rules of inheritance by performing many planned crosses and counting many offspring. Neither of these approaches is possible with humans. So human geneticists rely on pedigrees, family trees that show the segregation of phenotypes (and alleles) in several generations of related individuals. Because humans have such small numbers of offspring, human pedigrees do not show the clear proportions of offspring that Mendel saw in his pea plants. For example, when two people marry who are both heterozygous for a recessive allele (say, Aa), there will be, for each of their children, a 25 percent probability that the child will be homozygous recessive (aa). Over many such marriages, one-fourth of all the children will be homozygous recessive (aa). But what about a single marriage? In human families, while the odds for each child remain the same, small numbers of children mitigate against getting the exact one-fourth proportion. So, in a family with two children, both could easily be aa (or Aa or AA). To deal with this ambiguity, human geneticists assume that any allele that causes an abnormal phenotype is rare in the population. This means that in a given family with the rare allele (say, one parent is Aa), it is highly unlikely that an outsider marrying into the family will have that same rare allele (the outsider is most likely AA). Human geneticists may wish to know whether a particular rare allele is dominant or recessive. A pedigree showing the pattern of inheritance of a rare dominant phenotype. The following are the key features to look for in such a pedigree: Every affected person has an affected parent;  About half of the offspring of an affected person are also affected; The phenotype occurs equally in both sexes. Compare this pattern with the pattern of inheritance of a rare recessive phenotype: Affected people usually have parents who are both not affected; About one-quarter of the children of affected parents are affected; The phenotype occurs equally in both sexes. In pedigrees showing recessive inheritance, it is not uncommon to find a marriage of two relatives. This observation is a result of the rarity of phenotypically abnormal alleles. For two phenotypically normal parents to have an affected child (aa), the parents must both be heterozygous (Aa). If the a allele is rare in the general population, the chance of two people marrying who are both carrying the same rare allele in quite low. On the other hand, if the particular recessive allele is present in a family, two cousins might share it. This is why studies on populations isolated either culturally (by religion, such as the Amish in the United States) or geographically (such as on islands) have been so valuable to human geneticists. People in these groups tend either to have large families, or marry among themselves, or both. Because the major use of pedigree analysis is the clinical evaluation and counseling of patients with inherited abnormalities, a single pair of alleles is usually followed. However, just as pedigree analysis shows the segregation of alleles, it also can show independent assortment if two different allele pairs are considered. 10.3 Alleles and Their Interactions 185Let's move on to the extensions of Mendelian genetics that have been developed by other workers, mostly in the early part of the twentieth century. Decades after Mendel's work, others discovered that his hereditary particles-genes-are chemical entities-DNA sequences-that are usually expressed as proteins. Accordingly, the different alleles of a gene are slightly different sequences of DNA at the same locus, which result in slightly different protein products. In the next chapter we'll see the molecular basis for the distinctions between alleles. In this section we deal with how alleles relate to one another, some of their general properties, and how they arise. In many cases, alleles do not show simple relationships between dominance and recessiveness. In others, a single allele may have multiple phenotypic effects when it is expressed. Existing alleles can form new alleles by mutation, so there can be many alleles for a single character.10.3.1 New alleles arise by mutation 186Different alleles exist because any gene is subject to mutation, which occurs when a gene is changed to a stable, heritable new form. In other words, an allele can mutate to become a different allele. Mutation, which will be discussed in detail in Chapter 12, is a random process; different copies of the same gene may be changed in different ways, depending on how and where the DNA sequence changes. One particular allele of a gene may be defined as the wild type, or standard, because it is present in most individuals in nature and gives rise to an expected trait or phenotype. Other alleles of that same gene, often called mutant alleles, may produce a different phenotype. The wild-type and mutant alleles reside at the same locus and are inherited according to the rules set forth by Mendel. A genetic locus with a wild-type allele that is present less than 99 percent of the time (the rest of the alleles being mutant) is said to be polymorphic (from the Greek poly, "many," and morph, "form").10.3.2 Many genes have multiple alleles 186Because of random mutations, a group of individuals may have more than two alleles of a given gene. (Any one individul has only two alleles, of course-one from its mother and one from its father.) In fact, there are many examples of such multiple alleles. Coat color in rabbits is determined by one gene with four alleles. There is a dominance hierarchy in the gene combinations: C > cch > ch > c. Any rabbit with the C allele (along with any of the four) is gray, and a rabbit that is cc is albino. The intermediate colors result from the different allelic combinations. Multiple alleles increase the number of possible phenotypes. In Mendel's monohybrid cross, there was just one pair of alleles (Ss) and two possible phenotypes (resulting from SS or Ss and ss). The four alleles of the rabbit coat color gene produce five phenotypes.10.3.3 Dominance is usually not complete 186In the single-pair alleles studied by Mendel dominance is complete when an individual is heterozygous. That is, an Ss individual will express the S phenotype. However, many genes have alleles that are not dominant and recessive to one another. Instead, the heterozygotes show an intermediate phenotype-at first glance like that predicted by the old blending theory of inheritance. For example, if a true-breeding red snapdragon is crossed with a true-breeding white one, all the F1 flowers are pink. That this phenomenon can still be explained in terms of Mendelian genetics, rather than blending, is readily demonstrated by a further cross. According to the blending theory, if one of the pink F1 snapdragons is crossed with a true-breeding white one, all the offspring should be a still lighter pink. In fact, approximately 1/2 of the offspring are white, and 1/2 are the same shade of pink as the original F1. When the F1 pink snapdragons are allowed to self-pollinate, the resulting F2 plants are distributed in a ratio of 1 red:2 pink:1 white:1. Clearly the hereditary particles-the genes-have not blended; in the F2 they are readily sorted out in their original forms. We can understand these results in terms of the Mendelian model. When a heterozygous phenotype is intermediate, as in the snapdragon example, the gene is said to be governed by incomplete dominance. All we need to do in cases like this is recognize that the heterozygotes show a phenotype intermediate between those of the two homozygotes. We can also understand incomplete dominance in molecular terms. Remember that genes code for the production of specific proteins, many of which are enzymes. Different alleles at a locus code for alternative forms of a protein. When the protein is an enzyme, the different forms often have different degrees of catalytic activity. In the snapdragon example, one allele codes for an enzyme that catalyzes a reaction leading to the formation of a red pigment in the flowers. The alternative allele codes for an altered enzyme that lacks catalytic activity for pigment production. Plants homozygous for this alternative allele cannot synthesize red pigment, and their flowers are white. Heterozygous plants, with only one allele for the functional enzyme, produce just enough red pigment that their flowers are pink. There are more examples of incomplete dominance than of complete dominance in nature. Thus an unusual feature of Mendel's report is that all seven of the examples he described are characterized by complete dominance. For dominance to be complete, a single copy of the dominant allele must produce enough of its protein product to give the maximum phenotypic response. For example, just one copy of the dominant allele T at one of the loci studied by Mendel leads to the production of enough of a growth-promoting chemical that Tt heterozygotes are as tall as homozygous dominant plants (TT)-the second copy of T causes no further growth of the stem. Homozygous recessive plants (tt) are much shorter because the allele t does not lead to the production of the growth promoter.10.3.4 In codominance, both alleles are expressed 186Sometimes two alleles at a locus produce two different phenotypes that both appear in heterozygotes. An example of this phenomenon, called codominance, is seen in the ABO blood group system in humans. Early attempts at blood transfusion-made before blood types were understood-frequently killed the patient. Around 1900, however, the Austrian scientist Karl Landsteiner mixed blood cells and serum (blood from which cells have been removed) from different individuals. He found that only certain combinations of blood are compatible. In other combinations, the red blood cells of one individual form clumps because of the presence in the other individual's serum of specific proteins, called antibodies, that react with foreign, or "nonself," cells. Proteins on nonself cells, called antigens, prompt the synthesis of antibodies. This discovery led to our ability to administer compatible blood transfusions that do not kill the recipient. Blood compatibility is determined by a set of three alleles (IA, IB, and IO) at one locus, which determines certain proteins (antigens) on the surface of red blood cells. Different combinations of these alleles in different people produce four different blood types, or phenotypes: A, B, AB, and O 1. When both IA and IB are present, both are expressed, resulting in the AB blood type, which includes antigens produced by both alleles.10.3.5 Some alleles have multiple phenotypic effects 187When a single allele has more than one distinguishable phenotypic effect, we say that the allele is pleiotropic. A familiar example of pleiotropy involves the allele responsible for the coloration pattern (light body, darker extremities) of Siamese cats, discussed later in this chapter. The same allele is also responsible for the characteristic crossed eyes of Siamese cats. Although these effects appear to be unrelated, both result from the same protein produced under the influence of the allele. 10.4 Gene Interactions 188Thus far we have treated the phenotype of an organism, with respect to a given character, as a simple result of its genotype, and we have implied that a single trait results from the alleles of a single gene. In fact, several genes may interact to determine a trait's phenotype. For example, height in people is determined by the actions of many genes, such as those that determine bone growth, hormone concentrations, and other aspects of development. Sometimes several genes act additively, so that the phenotype can be predicted by how many of these genes are active. To complicate things further, the physical environment may interact with the genetic constitution of an individual in determining the phenotype. Height in people, for example, is not determined only by their genes. Nutrition is just one environmental factor that undoubtedly has a strong influence on height.10.4.1 Some genes alter the effects of other genes 188Epistasis occurs when the phenotypic expression of one gene is affected by another gene. For example, several genes determine coat color in mice. The wild-type color is agouti, a grayish pattern resulting from bands on the individual hairs. The dominant allele B determines that the hairs will have bands and thus that the color will be agouti, whereas the homozygous recessive genotype bb results in unbanded hairs, and the mouse appears black. On another chromosome, a second locus affects an early step in the formation of hair pigments. The dominant allele A at this locus allows normal color development, but aa blocks all pigment production. Thus, aa mice are all-white albinos, irrespective of their genotype at the B locus 1. If a mouse with genotype AABB (and thus the agouti phenotype) is crossed with an albino of genotype aabb, the F1 is AaBb and has the agouti phenotype. If the F1 mice are crossed with each other to produce an F2 generation, epistasis will result in an expected phenotypic ratio of 9 agouti:3 black:4 albino. (Can you show why? The underlying ratio is the usual 9:3:3:1 for a dihybrid cross with unlinked genes, but look closely at each genotype and watch out for epistasis.) In another form of epistasis, two genes are mutually dependent: The expression of each depends on the alleles of the other. The epistatic action of such complementary genes may be explained as follows: Suppose gene A codes for enzyme A in the metabolic pathway for purple pigment in flowers, and gene B codes for enzyme B. In order for the pigment to be produced, both reactions must take place. The recessive alleles a and b code for nonfunctional enzymes. If a plant is homozygous for either a or b, the corresponding reaction will not occur, no purple pigment will form, and the flowers will be white.10.4.2 Hybrid vigor results from new gene combinations and interactions 188If Mendel's paper was the most important event in genetics in the nineteenth century, perhaps an equally important paper in applied genetics was published early in the twentieth by G. H. Shull, entitled "The composition of a field of maize" 1. For centuries, it has been known that if one takes two pure, homozygous genetic strains of a plant or animal, and crosses them, the result is offspring that are phenotypically much stronger, larger, and in general more "vigorous" than either of the parents. The mule, an offspring of a horse and a donkey, has been distinguished for 4,000 years by its hardiness and longevity. Conversely, avoidance of inbreeding (mating between close relatives) is a time-honored tradition among farmers growing crops and in human societies (where it is called incest). The reason for this is that close relatives tend to have the same recessive alleles, some of which may be harmful, as we saw in our discussion of human pedigrees above. Shull crossed two of the thousands of existing varieties of corn (maize). Both varieties produced about 20 bushels of corn per acre. But when he crossed them, the yield of their offspring was an astonishing 80 bushels per acre. This phenomenon is known as heterosis (short for heterozygosis), or hybrid vigor. The cultivation of hybrid corn spread rapidly in the United States and all over the world, quadrupling grain production. The practice of hybridization has spread to many other crops and animals used in agriculture. The actual mechanism by which hybrid vigor works is not known. A widely accepted hypothesis is overdominance, a situation in which the heterozygous condition in certain important genes is superior to either homozygote.10.4.3 Polygenes mediate quantitative inheritance 189Individual heritable characters are often found to be controlled by groups of several genes, called polygenes, of which each allele intensifies or diminishes the observed phenotype. As a result, variation in such characters is continuous, or quantitative) rather than, as in the examples we have been considering, discontinuous (or discrete). Many characters that vary continuously-such as height and other aspects of size, or skin color-are under polygenic control. The polygenes affecting a particular quantitative character are commonly located on many different chromosomes. Humans differ with respect to the amount of a dark pigment, melanin, in their skin 1. There is great variation in the amount of melanin among different people, but much of this variation is determined by alleles at just four (possibly three) loci. No alleles at these loci demonstrate dominance. Of course, skin color is not entirely determined by the genotype, since exposure to sunlight in fair-skinned people can cause the production of more melanin-that is, a suntan.10.4.4 The environment affects gene action 189The phenotype of an individual is not a result of its genotype alone. Genotype and environment interact to determine the phenotype of an organism. Environmental variables such as light, temperature, and nutrition can sharply affect the translation of a genotype into a phenotype. A familiar example involves the Siamese cat. This handsome animal normally has darker fur on its ears, nose, paws, and tail than on the rest of its body. These darkened extremities normally have a lower temperature than the rest of the body. A few simple experiments show that the Siamese cat has a genotype that results in dark fur, but only at temperatures below the general body temperature. If some dark fur is removed from the tail and the cat is kept at higher than usual temperatures, the new fur that grows in is light. Conversely, removal of light fur from the back, followed by local chilling of the area, causes the spot to fill in with dark fur. It is sometimes possible to determine the proportion of individuals in a group with a given genotype that actually show the expected phenotype. This proportion is called the penetrance of the genotype. The environment may also affect the expressivity of the genotype-that is, the degree to which it is expressed in an individual. For an example of environmental effects on expressivity, consider how Siamese cats kept indoors or outdoors in different climates might look. Uncertainty over how much of the phenotypic variation we observe is due to the environment and how much to the effects of polygenes complicates the analysis of quantitative inheritance. A useful approach that avoids this difficulty is to study identical twins, which develop from the same fertilized egg. Since such twins are genetically identical, any differences between them can be attributed to environmental effects. 10.5 Genes and Chromosomes 190The recognition that genes occupy characteristic positions on chromosomes and thus are segregated by meiosis enabled Mendel's successors to provide a physical explanation for his model of inheritance. It soon became apparent that the association of genes with chromosomes has other genetic consequences as well. In this section we will address the following questions: What is the pattern of inheritance of genes that occupy nearby loci on the same chromosome? How do we determine the order of genes on a chromosome-and the distances between them? Why were all the carriers of hemophilia in Queen Victoria's family women, and why were all of her descendants who had hemophilia men? The answers to these and many other genetic questions were worked out in studies of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster 1. Its small size, its ease of cultivation, and its short generation time made this animal an attractive experimental subject. Beginning in 1909, Thomas Hunt Morgan and his students established Drosophila as a highly useful laboratory organism in Columbia University's famous "fly room," where they discovered the phenomena described in this section. Drosophila remains extremely important in studies of chromosome structure, population genetics, the genetics of development, and the genetics of behavior.10.5.1 Linked genes are on the same chromosome 190In the immediate aftermath of the rediscovery of Mendel's laws, the second law-independent assortment-was considered to be generally applicable. However, some investigators, including R. C. Punnett (the inventor of the Punnett square), began to observe strange deviations from the expected 9:3:3:1 ratio in some dihybrid crosses. T. H. Morgan, too, obtained data not in accord with Mendelian ratios, and specifically not in accord with the law of independent assortment. Morgan crossed Drosophila of two known genotypes, BbVgvg ; bbvgvg, in which B, the wild type (gray body), is dominant over b (black body), and Vg (wild-type wing) is dominant over vg (vestigial, a very small wing). Morgan expected to see four phenotypes in a ratio of 1:1:1:1, but this was not what he observed. The body color gene and the wing size gene were not assorting independently; rather, they were for the most part inherited together. These results became understandable to Morgan when he assumed that the two loci are on the same chromosome-that is, that they are linked. After all, since the number of genes in a cell far exceeds the number of chromosomes, each chromosome must contain many genes. The full set of loci on a given chromosome constitutes a linkage group. The number of linkage groups in a species equals the number of homologous chromosome pairs. Suppose, now, that the Bb and Vgvg loci are indeed located on the same chromosome. If we assume that the linkage is absolute, we expect to see just two types of progeny from Morgan's cross. However, this is not always the case.10.5.2 Genes can be exchanged between chromatids 191Absolute linkage is extremely rare. If linkage were absolute, Mendel's second law (independent assortment of alleles at different loci) would apply only to loci on different chromosomes. What actually happens is more complex, and therefore more interesting. The chromosome is not unbreakable, so recombination of genes can occur. Genes at different loci on the same chromosome do sometimes separate from one another during meiosis.Genes may recombine when two homologous chromosomes physically exchange corresponding segments during prophase I of meiosis-that is, by crossing over 1. In other words, recombination may occur at a chiasma when homologous chromosomes are paired up during meiosis. Recall that the DNA has been replicated by this stage, and that each chromosome consists of two chromatids. The exchange event involves only two of the four chromatids, one from each member of the chromosome pair. The chiasma can occur at any point along the length of the chromosome. The chromosome sections involved are exchanged reciprocally, so both chromatids involved in crossing over become recombinant (that is, each chromatid ends up with genes from both parents). When crossing over takes place between two linked genes, not all progeny of a cross will have the parental types. Instead, recombinant offspring appear as well, and they appear in repeatable proportions called recombinant frequencies, which equal the number of recombinant progeny divided by the total number of progeny. Recombinant frequencies will be greater for loci that are far apart on the chromosome than for loci that are closer together, because a chiasma is more likely to cut between genes that are far apart than genes that are close together.10.5.3 Geneticists make maps of eukaryotic chromosomes 192If two loci are very close together on a chromosome, the odds for crossing over between them are small. In contrast, if two loci are far apart, crossing over could occur between them at many points. In 1911, Alfred Sturtevant, then an undergraduate student in T. H. Morgan's fly room, realized how that simple insight could be used to show where different genes lie on the chromosome in relation to one another. He suggested that the farther apart two genes are on a chromosome, the greater the likelihood that they will separate and recombine in meiosis. The Morgan group had determined recombinant frequencies for many pairs of linked genes. Sturtevant used these recombinant frequencies to create genetic maps that indicated the arrangement of genes along the chromosome 2. Ever since Sturtevant demonstrated this important point, geneticists have mapped the chromosomes of eukaryotes, prokaryotes, and viruses, assigning distances between genes in map units. A map unit corresponds to a recombinant frequency of 0.01; it is also referred to as a centimorgan (cM), in honor of the founder of the fly room. You, too, can work out a genetic map. 10.6 Sex Determination and Sex-Linked Inheritance 193In Kšlreuter's experience, and later in Mendel's, reciprocal crosses apparently always gave identical results. The reason is that in diploid organisms, chromosomes come in pairs. One member of each chromosome pair derives from each parent; it does not matter, in general, whether a dominant allele was contributed by the mother or by the father. But sometimes the parental origin of a chromosome does matter. To understand the types of inheritance in which parental origin is important, we must consider the ways in which sex is determined in different species.10.6.1 Sex is determined in different ways in different species 193In corn, a plant much studied by geneticists, every diploid adult has both male and female reproductive structures. The two types of tissue are genetically identical, just as roots and leaves are genetically identical. Plants such as maize and Mendel's pea plants, and animals such as earthworms, which produce both male and female gametes in the same organism, are said to be monoecious (from the Greek for "one house"). Other plants, such as date palms and oak trees, and most animals are dioecious ("two houses"), meaning that some individuals can produce only male gametes and the others can produce only female gametes. In other words, dioecious organisms have two sexes. In most dioecious organisms, sex is determined by differences in the chromosomes, but such determination operates in different ways in different groups of organisms. For example, the sex of a honeybee depends on whether it develops from a fertilized or an unfertilized egg. A fertilized egg is diploid and gives rise to a female bee-either a worker or a queen, depending on the diet during larval life (again, note how the environment affects the phenotype). An unfertilized egg is haploid and gives rise to a male drone. In many other animals, including humans, sex is determined by a single sex chromosome (or by a pair of them). Both males and females have two copies of each of the rest of the chromosomes, which are called autosomes. Female grasshoppers, for example, have two X chromosomes, whereas males have only one. Female grasshoppers are described as being XX (ignoring the autosomes) and males as XO (pronounced "ex-oh"). Females form eggs that contain one copy of each autosome and one X chromosome. Males form approximately equal amounts of two types of sperm: One type contains one copy of each autosome and one X chromosome; the other type contains only autosomes. When an X-bearing sperm fertilizes an egg, the zygote is XX, and develops into a female. When a sperm without an X fertilizes an egg, the zygote is XO, and develops into a male. This chromosomal mechanism ensures that the two sexes are produced in approximately equal numbers. As in grasshoppers, female mammals have two X chromosomes and males have one. However, male mammals also have a sex chromosome that is not found in females: the Y chromosome. Females may be represented as XX and males as XY. Males produce two kinds of gametes: Each has a complete set of autosomes, but half the gametes carry an X chromosome and the other half carry a Y. When an X-bearing sperm fertilizes an egg, the resulting XX zygote is female; when a Y-bearing sperm fertilizes an egg, the resulting XY zygote is male.Some subtle but important differences show up clearly in mammals with abnormal sex chromosome constitutions. These conditions, which result from nondisjunctions, as described in Chapter 9, tell us something about the functions of the X and Y chromosomes. In humans, XO individuals sometimes appear. Human XO individuals are females who are physically moderately abnormal but mentally normal; usually they are also sterile. The XO condition in humans is called Turner syndrome. It is the only known case in which a human can survive with only one member of a chromosome pair (here, the XY pair), although most XO conceptions terminate spontaneously early in development. XXY individuals also occur; this condition is known as Klinefelter syndrome. People with this genotype are sometimes taller than average, always sterile, and always male.10.6.2 The X and Y chromosomes have different functions 194The gene that determines maleness was identified through observations of people with chromosomal abnormalities. For example, some XY individuals who are women have been identified and studied; in these people, a small portion of the Y chromosome was missing. In other cases, men who were genetically XX had a small piece of the Y chromosome present, attached to another chromosome. The missing and present Y fragment in these two examples, respectively, contained the maleness-determining gene, which was named SRY (sex-determining region on the Y chromosome). The SRY gene codes for a protein involved in primary sex determination-that is, the determination of the kinds of gametes that will be produced gametes and the organs that will make them. In the presence of functional SRY protein, the embryo develops sperm-producing testes. If SRY protein is absent, the primary sex determination is female: ovaries and eggs develop. In this case, a gene on the X chromosome called DAX1 produces an anti-testis factor. So the role of SRY in a male is to inhibit the maleness inhibitor made by DAX1. Primary sex determination is not the same as secondary sex determination, which results in the outward manifestations of maleness and femaleness (such as body type, breast development, body hair, and voice). In fact, these outward characteristics are not determined directly by the presence or absence of the Y chromosome. Rather, they are determined by the actions of hormones, such as testosterone and estrogen.The Y chromosome functions differently in Drosophila melanogaster. Superficially, Drosophila follows the same pattern of sex determination as mammals-females are XX and males are XY. However, XO individuals are males (rather than females as in mammals) and almost always are indistinguishable from normal XY males except that they are sterile. XXY Drosophila are normal, fertile females. Thus, in Drosophila, sex is determined strictly by the ratio of X chromosomes to autosome sets. If there is one X chromosome for each set of autosomes, the individual is a female; if there is only one X chromosome for the two sets of autosomes, the individual is a male. The Y chromosome plays no sex-determining role in Drosophila, but it is needed for male fertility. In birds, moths, and butterflies, males are XX and females are XY. To avoid confusion, these forms are usually expressed as ZZ (male) and ZW (female). In these organisms, the female produces two types of gametes. Thus the egg determines the sex of the offspring, rather than the sperm, as in humans and fruit flies.10.6.3 Genes on sex chromosomes are inherited in special ways 195How does the existence of sex chromosomes affect patterns of inheritance? In Drosophila and in humans, the Y chromosome carries few known genes, but a substantial number of genes affecting a great variety of characters are carried on the X chromosome. The result of this arrangement is a deviation from the usual Mendelian ratios for the inheritance of genes located on the X chromosome. Any such gene is present in two copies in females, but in only one copy in males. Therefore, females may be heterozygous for genes that are on the X chromosome, but males will always be hemizygous for genes on the X chromosome-they will have only one of each, and it will be expressed. Kšlreuter's historic reciprocal crosses, mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, always gave the same outcome regardless of which parent displayed which trait. However, reciprocal crosses do not give identical results for characters whose genes are carried on the sex chromosomes. This is a sharp deviation from the rules governing the inheritance of alleles on autosomes. The first and still one of the best examples of sex-linked inheritance-inheritance of characters governed by loci on the sex chromosomes-is that of eye color in Drosophila. The wild-type eye color of these flies is red. In 1910, Sturtevant discovered a mutation that causes white eyes. He experimented by crossing flies of the wild-type and mutant phenotypes. His results demonstrated that the eye color locus is on the X chromosome. When homozygous red-eyed females were crossed with (hemizygous) white-eyed males, all the sons and daughters had red eyes, because red is dominant over white, and all the progeny had inherited a wild-type X chromosome from their mothers. However, in the reciprocal cross, in which a white-eyed female was mated with a red-eyed male, all the sons were white-eyed and all the daughters red-eyed. The sons from the reciprocal cross inherited their only X chromosome from their white-eyed mother; the Y chromosome they inherited from their father does not carry the eye color locus. The daughters, on the other hand, got an X chromosome with the white allele from their mother and an X chromosome bearing the red allele from their father; they were therefore red-eyed heterozygotes. When Morgan mated heterozygous females with red-eyed males, he observed that half their sons had white eyes, but all their daughters had red eyes. Thus, in this case, eye color was carried on the X chromosome and not on the Y.10.6.4 Human beings display many sex-linked characters 195The human X chromosome carries thousands of genes. The alleles at these loci follow the same pattern of inheritance as those for white eyes in Drosophila. One human X chromosome gene, for example, has a mutant recessive allele that leads to red-green color blindness, a hereditary disorder. Red-green color blindness appears in individuals who are homozygous or hemizygous for the mutant allele. Pedigree analysis of X-linked recessive phenotypes 2 reveals the following patterns: The phenotype appears much more often in males than in females, because only one copy of the rare allele is needed for its expression in males, while two copies must be present in females. A male with the mutation can pass it on only to his daughters; his sons get his Y chromosome. Daughters who receive one mutant X chromosome are heterozygous carriers. They are phenotypically normal, but they can can pass the muntant X to both sons and daughters (but only half the time: half of their X chromosomes carry the normal allele). The mutant phenotype can skip a generation if the mutation passes from a male to his daughter (phenotypically normal) to her son. As we will see in later chapters, there are several important human diseases that are inherited as X-linked recessives, including the most common forms of muscular dystrophy and hemophilia. England's Queen Victoria was a heterozygous carrier of hemophilia A, the bleeding disorder mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. She passed it on to some of her male offspring and thereby to many of the royal familes of Europe. Human mutations inherited as X-linked dominants are rarer than recessives, because dominants appear in every generation, and because people carrying the harmful mutations, even as heterozygotes, often fail to survive and/or reproduce. (Look at the four points above and try to determine what would happen if the mutation were dominant.) The small human Y chromosome carries only about 20 known genes. Among them are the maleness determinants, whose existence was suggested by the phenotypes of the XO and XXY individuals described on pages xxx-xxx. Y-linked alleles are passed from father to son. (You can verify this with a Punnett square.) 10.7 Non-Nuclear Inheritance 196The nucleus is not the only organelle in a eukaryotic cell that carries genetic material. As we described in Chapter 4, mitochondria and plastids, which may have arisen from bacteria that colonized other cells, contain small numbers of genes. For example, in humans, there are about 100,000 genes in the nucleus and 37 in mitochondria. Plastid genomes are about five times larger than those of mitochondria. In any case, the organelle genes include several that are important for organelle assembly and function, so it is not surprising that mutations of these genes have profound effects on the organism. The inheritance of organelle genes differs from that of nuclear genes for one reason: mitochondria and plastids are apparently passed on from the mother only. As you will see in later chapters, eggs contain abundant cytoplasm and organelles, but the only part of the sperm that survives to take part in the union of haploid gametes is the nucleus. So you have inherited your mother's mitochondria (with their genes), but not your father's. There are several additional factors that make cytoplasmic inheritance differ from the normal, Mendelian pattern. There may be hundreds of mitochondria and/or plastids in a cell. So a cell is not diploid for organellegenes; rather, it is highly polyploid. A second factor is that organelle genes tend to mutate at much faster rates than nuclear genes, so there are multiple alleles of organelle genes. The phenotypes of mutations in the DNA of organelles reflect the organelles' roles. For example, some plastid mutations affect proteins that assemble chlorophyll molecules into the photosystem reaction centers, and result in a phenotype that is essentially a white instead of a green tissue. Mitochondrial mutations that affect one of the complexes in the electron transport chain result in less ATP production. They have especially noticeable effects in tissues with a high energy requirement, such as the nervous system, muscles, and kidneys. In 1995, Greg Lemond, a professional cyclist who had won the famous Tour de France three times, was forced to retire because of muscle weakness suspected to be caused by a mitochondrial mutation.11.1 DNA: The Genetic Material 199During the first half of the twentieth century, the hereditary material was generally assumed to be a protein. The impressive chemical diversity of proteins made this assumption seem reasonable. In addition, some proteins-notably enzymes and antibodies-showed great specificity. Nucleic acids, by contrast, were known to have only a few components and seemed too simple to carry the complex information expected in the genetic material. Circumstantial evidence, however, pointed to DNA. It was in the right place, since it was an important component of the nucleus and chromosomes, which were known to carry genes. And it was present in the right amounts. During the 1920s, a dye was developed that bound specifically to DNA and turned red in direct proportion to the amount of DNA present. When different cells were stained with this dye and their color intensity measured, each species appeared to have its own specific nuclear DNA content. Furthermore, the quantity in somatic cells was twice that in eggs or sperm-as might be expected for diploid and haploid cells, respectively. These two observations were consistent with DNA as the genetic material. But circumstantial evidence is not a scientific demonstration of cause and effect. After all, proteins are also present in nuclei. The convincing demonstration that DNA is the genetic material came from two lines of experiments, one on bacteria and the other on bacterial viruses.11.1.1 DNA from one type of bacterium genetically transforms another type 200The history of biology is filled with incidents in which research on one specific topic has-with or without answering the question originally asked-contributed richly to another, apparently unrelated area. Such a case of "serendipity" is the work of Frederick Griffith, an English physician. In the 1920s, Griffith was studying the disease-causing behavior of the bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae, or pneumococcus, one of the agents that cause pneumonia in humans. He was trying to develop a vaccine against this devastating illness (antibiotics had not yet been discovered). He was working with two strains of pneumococcus. A bacterial strain is a population of cells descended from a single parent cell; strains differ in one or more inherited characteristics. Griffith's strains were designated S and R because, when grown in the laboratory, one produces shiny, smooth (S) colonies, and the other produces colonies that look rough (R). When the S strain was injected into mice, the mice died within a day, and the hearts of the dead mice were found to be teeming with the deadly bacteria. When the R strain was injected, the mice did not become diseased. In other words, the S strain is virulent (disease-causing) and the R strain is nonvirulent. The virulence of the S strain is caused by a polysaccharide capsule that protects the bacterium from the immune defense mechanisms of the host. The R strain lacks this capsule, so the R strain cells can be inactivated by the defenses of a mouse. With the hope of developing a vaccine against pneumonia, Griffith inoculated some mice with heat-killed S pneumococci. These heat-killed bacteria did not produce infection. However, when Griffith inoculated other mice with a mixture of living R bacteria and heat-killed S bacteria, to his astonishment, the mice died of pneumonia. When he examined blood from the hearts of these mice, he found it full of living bacteria-many of them belonging to the virulent S strain! Griffith concluded that, in the presence of the dead S pneumococci, some of the living R pneumococci had been transformed into virulent S-strain organisms. We now call the phenomenon of the genetic alteration of an organism transformation. In terms of Griffith's observations, one could say that transformation is the uptake of information from the environment. As we'll see, today's definition of transformation is more precise. For now, note that living R pneumococci had gained a trait-virulence-from something in their environment. Did this transformation of the bacteria depend on something the mouse did? No. It was shown that simply incubating living R and heat-killed S bacteria together in a test tube yielded the same transformation. Next it was discovered that a cell-free extract of heat-killed S cells also transformed R cells. (A cell-free extract contains all the contents of ruptured cells, but no intact cells.) This result demonstrated that some substance-called at the time a chemical transforming principle-from the dead S pneumococci could cause a heritable change in the affected R cells. From these observations, some scientists concluded that this transforming principle carried heritable information, and thus was the genetic material.11.1.2 The transforming principle is DNA 201The identification of the transforming principle was a crucial step in the history of biology, accomplished over a period of several years by Oswald T. Avery and his colleagues at what is now Rockefeller University. They treated samples of the transforming principle in a variety of ways to destroy different types of substances-proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids-and tested the treated samples to see if they had retained transforming activity. The answer was always the same: If the DNA in the sample was destroyed, transforming activity was lost; everything else was dispensable. As a final step, Avery, with Colin MacLeod and MacLyn McCarty, isolated virtually pure DNA from a sample of pneumococcal transforming principle and showed that it caused bacterial transformation. The work of Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty, published in 1944, was a milestone in establishing that DNA is the genetic material in cells. However, it had little impact at the time, for two reasons. First, most scientists did not believe that DNA was chemically complex enough to be the hereditary material, especially given the great chemical complexity of proteins. Second, and perhaps more important, it was not yet obvious that bacteria even had genes; bacterial genetics was still to be elucidated.11.1.3 Viral replication experiments confirm that DNA is the genetic  material 201A report published in 1952 by Alfred D. Hershey and Martha Chase of the Carnegie Laboratory of Genetics had a much greater immediate impact than did Avery's 1944 paper. The Hershey-Chase experiment was carried out with a virus that infects bacteria. This virus, called T2 bacteriophage, consists of little more than a DNA core packed inside a protein coat. The virus is thus made of the two materials that were, at the time, the leading candidates for the genetic material. When a T2 bacteriophage attacks a bacterium, part (but not all) of the virus enters the bacterial cell. Hershey and Chase set out to determine which part of the virus-protein or DNA-enters the bacterial cell. To trace these two components during the life cycle of the virus 2b), Hershey and Chase labeled each with a specific radioactive tracer. All proteins contain some sulfur (in the amino acids cysteine and methionine), an element not present in DNA, and sulfur has a radioactive isotope, 35S. The deoxyribose-phosphate "backbone" of DNA, on the other hand, is rich in phosphorus, an element that is not present in most proteins-and phosphorus also has a radioactive isotope, 32P. Hershey and Chase grew one batch of T2 in a bacterial culture in the presence of 32P, so that all the viral DNA was labeled with 32P. Similarly, all the proteins of another batch of T2 were labeled with 35S. In separate experiments, Hershey and Chase combined radioactive viruses containing either 32P or 35S with bacteria. After a few minutes, they agitated the mixtures vigorously in a kitchen blender, which (without bursting the bacteria) stripped away the parts of the virus that had not penetrated the bacteria. Then, using a centrifuge, Hershey and Chase separated the bacteria from the rest of the material. They found that most of the 35S (and thus the protein) had separated from the bacteria, and that most of the 32P (the DNA) had stayed with the bacteria. These results suggested that the DNA was transferred to the bacteria, whereas the protein remained outside. Hershey and Chase then performed similar but longer experiments, allowing a progeny generation of viruses to be collected. The resulting T2 progeny (the "offspring" of the original viruses) contained almost none of the original 35S, but about one-third of the original 32P-and thus, presumably, one-third of the original DNA. Because DNA was carried over in the virus from generation to generation but protein was not, a logical conclusion was that the hereditary information of the virus is contained in the DNA. The Hershey-Chase experiment convinced most scientists that DNA is the carrier of hereditary information. By this time, other researchers had identified mutations-and therefore genes-in viruses and bacteria. 11.2 The Structure of DNA 202Once scientists agreed that the genetic material is DNA, they wanted to learn its precise chemical structure. In the structure of DNA, they hoped to find the answers to two questions: how DNA is replicated between nuclear divisions, and how it causes the synthesis of specific proteins. Both expectations were fulfilled. X ray crystallography studies provided the first clues about the dimensions of DNA and hinted that it had a helical form. Dimensionally accurate models built by James Watson and Francis Crick completed the picture.11.2.1 X ray crystallography provided clues to DNA structure 202The structure of DNA was deciphered only after many types of experimental evidence and theoretical considerations were combined. The most crucial evidence was obtained by X ray crystallography. The positions of atoms in a crystalline substance can be inferred from the pattern of diffraction of X rays passed through it, but even today this is not an easy task when the substance is of enormous molecular weight. In the early 1950s, even a highly talented X ray crystallographer could (and did) look at the best available images from DNA preparations and fail to see what they meant. Nonetheless, the attempt to characterize DNA would have been impossible without the crystallographs prepared by the English chemist Rosalind Franklin. Franklin's work, in turn, depended on the success of the English biophysicist Maurice Wilkins in preparing very uniformly oriented DNA fibers, which provided samples for diffraction that were far better than previous ones.11.2.2 The chemical composition of DNA was known 203The chemical composition of DNA also provided important clues about its structure. Biochemists knew that DNA was a polymer of nucleotides. Each nucleotide of DNA consists of a molecule of the sugar deoxyribose, a phosphate group, and a nitrogen-containing base. The only differences among the four nucleotides of DNA are their nitrogenous bases: the purines adenine (A) and guanine (G), and the pyrimidines cytosine (C) and thymine (T). In 1950, Erwin Chargaff at Columbia University reported some observations of major importance. He and his colleagues had found that DNA from many different species-and from different sources within a single organism-exhibits certain regularities. In almost all DNA the following rule holds: The amount of adenine equals the amount of thymine, and the amount of guanine equals the amount of cytosine. As a result, the total abundance of purines equals the total abundance of pyrimidines. The structure of DNA could not have been worked out without this information, yet its significance was overlooked for at least three years. Interestingly, the ratio of A + T to G + C varies widely among different organisms. This observation reinforced the importance of Chargaff's rule.11.2.3 Watson and Crick described the double helix 203The solution to the puzzle of the structure of DNA was accelerated by the technique of model building: assembling three-dimensional representations of possible molecular structures using known relative molecular dimensions and known bond angles. This technique, originally exploited in structural studies by the American chemist Linus Pauling, was used by the English physicist Francis Crick and the American geneticist James Watson, then both at the Cavendish Laboratory of Cambridge University. Watson and Crick attempted to combine all that had been learned so far about DNA structure into a single coherent model. The crystallographers' results  convinced Watson and Crick that the DNA molecule is helical (cylindrically spiral) and provided the values of certain distances within the helix. The results of density measurements and previous model building suggested that there are two polynucleotide chains in the molecule. The modeling studies had also led to the conclusion that the two chains in DNA run in opposite directions-that is, that they are antiparallel. Crick and Watson built several models. Late in February of 1953, they built the one that established the general structure of DNA. There have been minor amendments to their first published structure, but the principal features remain unchanged.11.2.4 Four key features define DNA structure 204Four features summarize the molecular architecture of DNA. The DNA molecule is: a double-stranded helix; of uniform diameter; right-handed (that is, it twists to the right, as do the threads on most screws); antiparallel (the two strands run in opposite directions). The sugar-phosphate backbones of the polynucleotide chains coil around the outside of the helix, and the nitrogenous bases point toward the center. The two chains are held together by hydrogen bonding between specifically paired bases. Consistent with Chargaff's rule, adenine (A) pairs with thymine (T) by forming two hydrogen bonds, and guanine (G) pairs with cytosine (C) by forming three hydrogen bonds. Every base pair consists of one purine (A or G) and one pyrimidine (C or T). This pattern is known as complementary base pairing. Because the AT and GC pairs, like rungs of a ladder, are of equal length and fit identically into the double helix, the diameter of the helix is uniform. The base pairs are flat, and their stacking in the center of the molecule is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions, contributing to the overall stability of the double helix. What does it mean to say that the two DNA strands run in opposite directions? The direction of a polynucleotide can be defined by looking at the linkages (called phosphodiester bonds) between adjacent nucleotides. In the sugar-phosphate backbone of DNA, the phosphate groups connect to the 3? carbon of one deoxyribose molecule and the 5? carbon of the next, linking successive sugars together. The prime (?) designates the position of a carbon atom in the five-carbon sugar deoxyribose. Thus the two ends of a polynucleotide differ. Polynucleotides have a free (not connected to another nucleotide) 5? phosphate group (-OPO33-)at one end, called the 5? end; a free 3? hydroxyl group (-OH) is at the other, the 3? end. The 5? end of one strand in a DNA double helix is paired with the 3? end of the other strand, and vice versa; in other words, the strands run in opposite directions.11.2.5 The double helical structure of DNA is essential to its function 204The genetic material must perform four important functions, and the DNA molecule modeled by Watson and Crick was elegantly suited to three of them. Genetic material should be able to store an organism's genetic information. With its millions of nucleotides in a sequence that differs in every species and every individual, DNA fits this role nicely. The genetic material must be capable of mutations, or permanent changes in its information. For DNA, mutations might be simple changes in the linear sequence of nucleotide pairs. The genetic material must be precisely replicated in the cell division cycle. Replication could be accomplished by complementary base pairing, A with T and G with C. In the original publication of their findings in the journal Nature in 1953, Watson and Crick coyly pointed out, "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material." The genetic material must be expressed as the phenotype. This function is not inherent in the structure of DNA; however, as we show in the next chapter, it also turns out to be well served by DNA. 11.3 DNA Replication 206Watson and Crick's model for DNA replication was soon confirmed. First, experiments showed DNA replicated from template strands in a test tube containing simple substrates and an enzyme. Then an elegant experiment showed that each of the two strands of the double helix serves as a template for a new strand.11.3.1 Three modes of DNA replication appeared possible 206Just three years after Watson and Crick published their paper in Nature, their prediction that the DNA molecule contains the information needed for its own replication was demonstrated by the work of Arthur Kornberg, then at Washington University in St. Louis. Kornberg showed that DNA can replicate in a test tube with no cells present. The only requirements are DNA, a specific enzyme (which he obtained from bacteria and called DNA polymerase), and a mixture of four precursors: the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates dATP, dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP. If any one of the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates is omitted from the reaction mixture, DNA does not replicate. Somehow, the DNA itself serves as a template for the reaction-a guide to the exact placement of nucleotides in the new strand. Where there is a T in the template, there must be an A in the new strand, and so forth. How does DNA perform the template function; that is, how exactly does the molecule replicate? There were three possible replication patterns that would result in complementary base pairing: Semiconservative replication, in which each parent strand serves as a template for a new strand and the two new DNA's each have one old and one new strand; Conservative replication, in which the original double helix serves as a template for, but does not contribute to, the new double helix; Dispersive replication, in which fragments of the original DNA molecule serve as templates for assembling two molecules, each containing old and new parts, perhaps at random. Watson and Crick's original paper suggested that DNA replication was semiconservative, but Kornberg's experiment did not provide a basis for choosing among these three models.11.3.2 Meselson and Stahl demonstrated that DNA replication is semiconservative 207A clever experiment conducted by Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl convinced the scientific community that semiconservative replication is the correct model. Working at the California Institute of Technology in 1957, they devised a simple way to distinguish old strands of DNA from new ones: density labeling. The key to their experiment was the use of a "heavy" isotope of nitrogen. Heavy nitrogen (15N) is a rare, nonradioactive isotope that makes molecules containing it more dense than chemically identical molecules containing the common isotope, 14N. To distinguish DNA of different densities (that is, DNA containing 15N versus DNA containing 14N), Meselson, Stahl, and Jerome Vinograd invented a new centrifugation procedure using a cesium chloride (CsCl) solution. Spinning solutions or suspensions at high speed in a centrifuge causes the solutes or particles to separate, and they form a gradient according to their density. A concentrated solution of CsCl has a density very close to that of DNA. At high gravitational forces, cesium ions sediment out of the solution to some extent, establishing a gradient from low density at the top of the centrifuge tube to high density at the bottom. When a DNA sample is dissolved in CsCl and centrifuged at about 100,000 times the force of gravity, the DNA gathers in a band at a position in the tube where the density of the CsCl solution equals its own density. After developing this method of distinguishing DNA densities, Meselson and Stahl grew a culture of the bacterium Escherichia coli for 17 generations in a medium in which the nitrogen source (ammonium chloride, NH4Cl) was made with 15N instead of 14N. As a result, all the DNA in the bacteria was "heavy." They grew another culture in a medium with 14N, and extracted DNA from both cultures. When the extracts were combined and centrifuged with CsCl, two separate DNA bands formed, showing that this method could distinguish DNA samples of slightly different densities. Next, Meselson and Stahl grew another E coli culture on 15N medium, then transferred it to normal 14N medium and allowed the bacteria to continue growing 1. Under the conditions they used, E coli replicates its DNA every 20 minutes. Meselson and Stahl collected some of the bacteria after each division and extracted DNA from the samples. Meselson and Stahl observed that the DNA banding in the density gradient was different in each bacterial generation. At the time of the transfer, the DNA was uniformly labeled with 15N, and hence was relatively dense. After one generation, when the DNA had been duplicated once, all the DNA was of an intermediate density. After two generations, there were two equally large DNA bands: one of low density and one of intermediate density. In samples from subsequent generations, the proportion of low-density DNA increased steadily. The results of this experiment can be explained by the semiconservative model of DNA replication. The high-density DNA had two 15N strands; the intermediate-density DNA had one 15N and one 14N strand; and the low-density DNA had two 14N strands. In the first round of DNA replication, the strands of the double helix-both heavy with 15N-separated. While separated, each strand acted as the template for a second strand, which contained only 14N and hence was less dense. Each double helix then consisted of one 15N and one 14N strand and was of intermediate density. In the second replication, the 14N-containing strands directed the synthesis of partners with 14N, creating low-density DNA, and the 15N strands got new 14N partners 1. If the DNA had replicated in accord with either of the other models, the results would have been quite different. The crucial observation demonstrating the semiconservative model was that intermediate-density DNA (15N-14N) appeared in the first generation and continued to appear in subsequent generations. 11.4 The Mechanism of DNA Replication 209But how does DNA get replicated semiconservatively? There are four requirements for this process: DNA must act as a template for complementary base pairing. The four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates, dATP, dGTP, dCTP, and dTTP, must be present. A DNA polymerase enzyme is needed to bring the substrates to the template and catalyze the reactions. A source of chemical energy is needed to drive this highly endergonic synthesis reaction. DNA replication takes place in two steps: The DNA is locally denatured (unwound) to separate the two template strands and make them available for base pairing. The new nucleotides are linked by covalent bonding to each template strand in a sequence determined by complementary base pairing. A key observation of virtually all DNA replication is that nucleotides are always added to the growing strand at the 3? end-the end at which the DNA strand has a free hydroxyl (-OH) group on the 3? carbon of its terminal deoxyribose 1. The three phosphate groups in a deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate are attached to the 5? position of the sugar. So when a new nucleotide is added to DNA, it can attach only to the 3? end. When DNA polymerase brings a new deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate to the 3? end of the chain, the free hydroxyl group on the chain reacts with one of the substrate's phosphate groups. As this happens, the bond linking the terminal two phosphate groups to the rest of the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate breaks, and thereby releases energy for this reaction. The resulting pyrophosphate ion, consisting of the two terminal phosphate groups, also breaks, forming two phosphate ions and in the process releasing additional free energy. The phosphate group still on the nucleotide becomes part of the sugar-phosphate backbone of the growing DNA molecule.11.4.1 DNA is threaded through a replication complex 209DNA is replicated through the interaction of the template DNA with a huge protein complex that catalyzes the reactions. All chromosomes have at least one sequence of nucleotides, called the origin of replication, that is recognized by this replication complex. DNA replicates in both directions from the origin, forming two replication forks. Both of the separated strands of the parent molecule act as templates, and the formation of the new strands is guided by complementary base pairing. Until recently, DNA replication was depicted as a locomotive (the replication complex) moving along a railroad track (the DNA) 13, view. The current view is that this is not so. Instead, the replication complex is stationary, attached to nuclear structures, and it is the DNA that moves, essentially threading through the complex as single strands and emerging as double strands 13, view. During S phase in eukaryotes, there are about 100 replication complexes, and each of them contains as many as 300 individual replication forks. All replication complexes contain several proteins with different roles. We will describe these proteins as we examine the steps of the process: DNA helicase opens up the double helix. Single-strand binding proteins keep the two strands separated. RNA primase makes the primer strand needed to get replication under way. DNA polymerase adds nucleotides to the primer that are complementary to the template, proofreads the DNA, and repairs it. DNA ligase seals up breaks in the sugar-phosphate backbone.11.4.2 Small, circular DNA's replicate from a single origin, while large, linear DNA's have many origins 209The key event at the origin of replication is the localized unwinding (denaturation) of DNA. There are several forces that hold the two strands together, including hydrogen bonding and the hydrophobic stacking of bases. An enzyme, DNA helicase, uses energy from ATP hydrolysis to unwind the DNA, and special proteins bind to the unwound strands to keep them that way, preventing them from reassociating into a double helix. This makes the two template strands available for complementary base pairing. Small chromosomes, such as the million-base-pair DNA of bacteria, have a single origin of replication. As the DNA moves through the replication complex, the replication forks grow around the circle. Finally, two interlocking circular DNA's are formed, and they are separated by an enzyme called DNA topoisomerase. In large chromosomes, such as a human chromosome that has 80 million base pairs, there are hundreds of origins of replication. Because each replicating factory has many adjacent replication complexes, adjacent origins of replication along the chromosome can bind at the same time and are replicated simultaneously. So there are many replication forks in eukaryotic DNA.11.4.3 Most DNA polymerases need a primer 210Like most enzymes, DNA polymerases are much larger than their substrates, the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates, and the template DNA, which is very thin. Molecular models of the enzyme-substrate-template complex 1 show that the enzyme is shaped like an open hand with a palm, a thumb, and fingers. The palm holds the active site of the enzyme and brings together the substrate and template. The finger regions rotate inward and have precise shapes that just fit the appropriate nucleotide. DNA polymerases can elongate a polynucleotide strand, but they cannot start a strand from scratch. DNA polymerases require the assistance of a previously existing strand of DNA or RNA to which they can add new nucleotides. Such a helper strand is called a primer. DNA polymerases add nucleotides to the 3? end of the primer. In DNA replication, the primer is a short single strand of RNA 1. This RNA strand, complementary to the DNA template strand, is formed by an enzyme called a primase, which is one of several polypeptides bound together in an aggregate called a primosome. DNA polymerase adds nucleotides to the primer until the replication of that section of DNA has been completed. Then the RNA primer is degraded and DNA is added in its place. When DNA replication is complete, each daughter molecule consists only of DNA.11.4.4 DNA polymerase III extends the new DNA strands 211Bacterial cells contain more than one DNA polymerase. DNA polymerase III is the enzyme that catalyzes the elongation of new DNA strands at the replication forks in prokaryotes. Besides DNA polymerase III, various other proteins play roles in replacement of the RNA primer and in other replication tasks. Recall that the two original strands are antiparallel; that is, the 3? end of one strand is paired with the 5? end of the other. One template strand is exposed at its 3? end, which presents no problem-its complementary strand is synthesized continuously as the replication fork proceeds through the replication complex. This daughter strand, called the leading strand, elongates from its own 5? to its own 3??end, as do all other nucleic acids. But the template for the second daughter strand-the lagging strand-is exposed from its 5? end toward its 3? end. Yet that template must direct the 5?-to-3? synthesis of the lagging strand. How can it do this, given that new nucleotides are added only at the 3? end of a polynucleotide chain?11.4.5 The lagging strand is synthesized from Okazaki fragments 211Synthesis of the lagging strand requires working in relatively small, backward-directed, discontinuous stretches (100 to 200 nucleotides at a time in eukaryotes; 1,000 to 2,000 at a time in prokaryotes). These discontinuous stretches are synthesized just as the leading strand is, by adding new nucleotides one at a time to the 3? end of the daughter strand, but the synthesis of this new daughter DNA moves in the direction opposite to that in which the replication fork is moving. These stretches of new DNA for the lagging strand are called Okazaki fragments, after their discoverer, the Japanese biochemist Reiji Okazaki. While the leading strand grows continuously "forward," the lagging strand grows in shorter, "backward" stretches with gaps between them. A single primer suffices for synthesis of the leading strand, but each Okazaki fragment in the lagging strand requires its own primer. DNA polymerase III synthesizes Okazaki fragments by adding nucleotides to the primer until it reaches the primer of the previous Okazaki fragment. At this point, DNA polymerase I (the original DNA polymerase that Kornberg discovered) removes the old RNA primer and replaces it with DNA. Left behind is a tiny nick-the final phosphodiester bond between the adjacent Okazaki fragments is missing 1. Another enzyme, DNA ligase, catalyzes the formation of that bond, linking the fragments and making the lagging strand whole. Working together, DNA helicase, the two DNA polymerases, RNA primase, DNA ligase, and the other proteins do the complex job of DNA synthesis with a speed and accuracy that are almost unimaginable. In E coli, the replication complex makes new DNA at a rate in excess of 1,000 base pairs per second, committing errors in fewer than one base in 108 to 1012. 11.5 DNA Proofreading and Repair 212DNA must be faithfully replicated and maintained. The price of failure can be great-perhaps even death. The transmission of genetic information is at stake, as is the functioning of a cell or multicellular organism. Yet the replication of DNA is not perfectly accurate, and the DNA of nondividing cells is subject to damage by environmental agents. In the face of these threats, how has life gone on so long? The preservers of life are DNA repair mechanisms. DNA polymerases initially make a significant number of mistakes in assembling polynucleotide strands. In E coli, for example, the observed error rate would result in flaws in approximately one out of every ten genes each time the cell divided. In humans, about 1,000 genes in every cell would be affected each time the cell divided. Fortunately, our cells normally have at least three DNA repair mechanisms at their disposal: A proofreading mechanism corrects errors as DNA polymerase makes them. A mismatch repair mechanism scans DNA after it has been made and corrects any base-pairing mismatches. An excision repair mechanism removes abnormal bases that have formed because of chemical damage and replaces them with functional bases.11.5.1 Proofreading and repair mechanisms ensure that DNA replication is accurate 213After introducing a new nucleotide into a growing polynucleotide strand, the DNA polymerases perform a proofreading function. When a DNA polymerase recognizes a mispairing of bases, it removes the improperly introduced nucleotide and tries again. (DNA helicase, DNA ligase, and other proteins of the replication complex also play roles in this key mechanism.) The polymerase is likely to be successful in inserting the correct monomer the second time, because the error rate for this process is only about 1 in 10,000 base pairs. This proofreading mechanism greatly lowers the overall error rate for replication. After DNA has been replicated and during genetic recombination, a second mechanism surveys the newly replicated molecule and looks for mismatched base pairs. For example, this mismatch repair system might detect an AC base pair instead of an AT pair. Since both AT and GC pairs obey the base-pairing rules, how does the repair mechanism "know" whether the AC pair should be repaired by removing the C and replace it with T, for instance, or by removing the A and replacing it with G? The repair mechanism can detect the "wrong" base because a newly synthesized DNA strand is chemically modified some time after replication. In eukaryotes, methyl groups (;sbCH are added to some cytosines to form 5-methylcytosine. In prokaryotes, guanine is methylated. Right after replication, methylation has not yet occurred, so the newly replicated strand is "marked" by being unmethylated, as the one in which errors should be corrected. When mismatch repair fails, DNA sequences are altered. One form of colon cancer arises in part from a failure of mismatch repair. DNA molecules can also be damaged during the life of a cell (e.g., when it is in G. Some cells live and play important roles in the organism for many years, even though their DNA is constantly at risk from hazards such as high-energy radiation, chemicals that induce mutations, and random spontaneous chemical reactions. Cells owe their lives to DNA repair mechanisms. For example, in excision repair, certain enzymes "inspect" the cell's DNA. When they find mispaired bases, chemically modified bases, or points at which one strand has more bases than the other (with the result that one or more bases of one strand form an unpaired loop), these enzymes cut the defective strand. Another enzyme cuts away the bases adjacent to and including the offending base, and DNA polymerase and DNA ligase synthesize and seal up a new (usually correct) piece to replace the excised one. Our dependence on this repair mechanism is underscored by our susceptibility to various diseases that arise from excision repair defects. One example is the skin disease xeroderma pigmentosum. People with this disease lack a mechanism that normally repairs damage caused by the ultraviolet radiation in sunlight. Without this mechanism, a person exposed to sunlight develops skin cancer.11.5.2 DNA repair requires energy 214What does it cost the cell to keep its DNA accurate and ensure that it replicates properly? At first glance, you might expect DNA polymerization to be fairly "neutral" energetically, because adding a new monomer to the chain requires the formation of a new phosphodiester bond, but is supported by the hydrolysis of one of the high-energy bonds in the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate. Overall, however, this reaction is slightly endergonic. But help is available in the form of the pyrophosphate ion released in the polymerization reaction. The enzyme pyrophosphatase cleaves the high-energy bond in the pyrophosphate. Coupling this reaction to the polymerization gives it a big boost. Noncovalent bonds also play a major role in favoring DNA polymerization. Hydrogen bonds form between the complementarily paired bases, and other weak interactions form as the bases stack in the middle of the double helix. These bonds and interactions stabilize the DNA molecule and help drive the polymerization reaction. Thus DNA synthesis itself does not take a tremendous toll in energy. DNA repair processes, however, are far from cheap energetically. Some are very inefficient. Nonetheless, the cell deploys many DNA repair mechanisms, some overlapping in function with others. Why? Perhaps because the cell simply can't afford to leave its genetic information unprotected, regardless of the cost. 11.6 Practical Applications of DNA Replication 214The principles that underlie DNA replication in cells have been applied to develop two laboratory techniques that have been vital in analyzing genes and genomes. First, the nucleotide sequence of a DNA molecule can be determined, and second, short DNA sequences can be copied using the polymerase chain reaction technique.11.6.1 The nucleotide sequence of DNA can be determined 214As we saw earlier in this chapter, the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates that are the normal substrates for DNA replication contain the sugar 2-deoxyribose; thus they are referred to as dNTPs. If instead of deoxyribose, the sugar used in the NTPs is 2,3-dideoxyribose, the resulting nucleoside triphosphates (ddNTPs) will still be picked up by DNA polymerase and added to a growing DNA chain. However, because ddNTPs lack a hydroxyl group at the 3? position, the next nucleotide cannot be added 2. Thus synthesis stops at the place where ddNTP is incorporated into the growing DNA strand. In the sequencing technique, a molecule of DNA (usually no more than 500 base pairs long) is denatured. Copies of the resulting single-stranded DNA are combined with DNA polymerase to synthesize the complementary strand; Short primers appropriate for that sequence; The four dNTPs (dATP, dGTP, dCTP, and dTTP); Small amounts of the four ddNTPs, each with a fluorescent "tag" that emits a different color of light. The reaction mixture soon contains a DNA mixture made up of the original DNA strands (those whose sequence will be determined) and shorter complementary strands. The latter, each ending with a ddNTP, are of varying lengths. For example, each time a T is reached on the template strand, the growing complementary strand adds either dATP or ddATP. If dATP is added, the strand continues to grow. If ddATP is added, chain growth terminates at that point. After DNA replication has been allowed to proceed for a while in a test tube, the numerous short fragments are denatured from their templates and separated by gel electrophoresis. This technique measures the length of the DNA fragments, and can detect differences in fragment length as short as one base. During the electrophoresis run, the fragments pass through a laser beam that excites the fluorescent tags. The light emitted is then detected, and the resulting information-that is, which ddNTP is at the end of a strand of which length-is fed into a computer, which processes it and prints out the sequence. The computer can also be programmed to analyze the sequence, and these analyses have formed the basis of the new science of genomics, as we will describe in Chapters 13, 14, and 17.11.6.2 The polymerase chain reaction makes multiple copies of DNA 214Since DNA can be replicated in the test tube, using enzymes from E coli and simple substrates, it is possible to make quantities of a single DNA sequence. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique is an extension of this early work, which essentially automates the process and makes it much more efficient. PCR is not very complicated: A short region of DNA is copied many times in the test tube by DNA polymerase. PCR is a cyclic process in which the following sequence of steps is repeated over and over again 2. It begins with the same first two steps as DNA sequencing: Double-stranded DNA is denatured by heat into single strands. Short primers for DNA replication are added to the mixture. DNA polymerase catalyzes the production of complementary new strands. A single cycle, taking a few minutes, doubles the amount of DNA and leaves the new DNA in the double-stranded state. Repeating the cycle many times can theoretically lead to a geometric increase in the number of copies of the DNA sequence. The PCR technique requires that the base sequences at the 3? end of each strand of the target DNA be known so that a complementary primer, usually 15 to 20 bases long, can be made in the laboratory. Because of the uniqueness of DNA sequences, usually two primers of this length will bind to only one region of DNA in an organism's genome. This specificity in the face of the incredible diversity of target DNA is a key to the power of PCR. One potential problem with PCR involves its temperature requirements. To denature the DNA during each cycle, it must be heated to more than 90¡C-a temperature that destroys most DNA polymerases. Then it must be cooled to about 55¡C to allow the primer to hydrogen-bond to the single strands of template DNA. The PCR method would not be practical if new polymerase had to be added during each cycle after denaturation-an expensive and laborious proposition. This problem was solved by nature: In the hot springs at Yellowstone National Park, as well as other locations, there live bacteria called, appropriately, Thermus aquaticus. The means by which these organisms survive temperatures up to 95¡C was investigated by bacteriologist Thomas Brock and his colleagues. They discovered that T. aquaticus has an entire metabolic machinery that is heat-resistant, including DNA polymerase that does not denature at this high temperature. Scientists pondering the problem of amplifying DNA by PCR read Brock's basic research articles and got a clever idea: Why not use T. aquaticus DNA polymerase in the PCR reaction? It would not be denatured, and thus would not have to be added during each cycle. The idea worked, and earned biochemist Kerry Mullis a Nobel prize. PCR has had an enormous impact on genetic research. Some of its most striking applications will be described in Chapters 13 through 17.12 From DNA to Protein: Genotype to PhenotypeThe ocean is literally alive with light. About 90 percent of all marine animals living at depths between 200 and 1,000 meters are bioluminescent-they can use chemical reactions to produce light. In some cases, it helps them find a mate or food. In others, it acts like a burglar alarm, startling a predator. The jellyfish in the photograph is in the latter category. Clearly, this is a genetically transmitted characteristic that is important to the animal's survival. This jellyfish creates light by means of two proteins acting in sequence. The first, aequorin, absorbs light and transmits some of its excitation energy to a second protein, green fluorescent protein (GFP). It is GFP that gives off a green glow. As you will see in Chapter 17, GFP has become an invaluable tool in biological research, as it can be attached to other molecules, allowing them to be observed in real time in living cells and tissues because of the green glow. Here, however, the important conclusion is that bioluminescence-a phenotype-is essentially produced by the actions of two proteins. And these proteins are coded for by DNA sequences. This chapter deals with the mechanisms by which genes are expressed as proteins. We begin with evidence for the relationship between genes and proteins, and then fill in some of the details of the processes of transcription and translation. Finally, we define mutations and their phenotypes in specific molecular terms. 12.1 One Gene, One Polypeptide 218There are many steps between genotype and phenotype. Genes cannot, all by themselves, directly produce a phenotypic result, such as a particular eye color, a specific seed shape, or a cleft chin, any more than a compact disk can play a symphony without the help of a CD player. With the gene defined as a DNA sequence, the first step in relating genes to phenotypes was to define phenotypes in molecular terms. The molecular basis of phenotypes was actually discovered before the discovery of DNA as the genetic material. Using organisms as diverse as humans and bread molds, scientists studied the chemical differences between organisms carrying wild-type and mutant alleles. They found that the major phenotypic differences were in specific proteins. In the 1940s, a series of experiments by George W. Beadle and Edward L. Tatum at the California Institute of Technology showed that when an altered gene resulted in an altered phenotype, the latter showed up as an altered enzyme protein. This finding was critically important in defining the phenotype in chemical terms. Beadle and Tatum experimented with the bread mold Neurospora crassa. The nuclei in the body of the mold are haploid (n), as are the reproductive spores. (This fact is important because it means that even recessive mutant alleles are easy to detect in experiments.) Beadle and Tatum grew Neurospora on a  minimal nutritional medium of sucrose, minerals, and a vitamin. Using this medium, the enzymes of wild-type Neurospora could catalyze the metabolic reactions needed to make all the chemical constituents of their cells, including proteins. These wild-type strains are called prototrophs ("original eaters"). Beadle and Tatum treated wild-type Neurospora with a mutagen-a chemical substance that causes mutations. When they examined the treated molds, they found some mutant strains could no longer grow on minimal medium, but needed additional nutrients that they could not make on their own. The scientists proposed that these auxotrophs ("increased eaters") must have suffered mutations in genes that coded for enzymes necessary for the synthesis of the nutrients they now needed to ingest. For each auxotrophic strain, Beadle and Tatum were able to find a single compound that, when added to the minimal medium, supported the growth of that strain. This result supported the idea that mutations have simple effects, and that each mutation causes a defect in only one enzyme in a metabolic pathway.
One group of auxotrophs, for example, could grow on minimal medium supplemented with the amino acid arginine. (Wild-type Neurospora makes arginine by itself.) These mutant strains were classified as arg mutants. Were their mutations different alleles of the same gene, or were they in different genes, each coding for an enzyme along the biochemical pathway for arginine synthesis? Mapping studies established that some of the arg mutations were at different loci, or on different chromosomes, and so were not alleles. Beadle and Tatum concluded that different genes could participate in governing a single biosynthetic pathway-in this case, the pathway leading to arginine synthesis. By growing different arg mutants in the presence of various compounds suspected to be intermediates in the synthetic metabolic pathway for arginine, Beadle and Tatum were able to classify each mutation as affecting one enzyme or another, and to order the compounds on the pathway. Then they broke open the wild-type and mutant cells and examined them for enzyme activities. The results confirmed their hypothesis: Each mutant strain was indeed missing a single active enzyme in the pathway. If a genetic mutation results in an abnormal or missing enzyme, then the wild-type gene must code for the normal enzyme. This conclusion led Beadle and Tatum to formulate the one-gene, one-enzyme hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, the function of a gene is to control the production of a single, specific enzyme. This proposal strongly influenced the subsequent development of the sciences of genetics and molecular biology. The English physician Archibald Garrod, who studied the inherited disease alkaptonuria, had made this proposal 40 years before. He linked the biochemical phenotype of the disease to an abnormal gene and a missing enzyme. There are hundreds of examples of such hereditary diseases, and we will return to them in Chapter 18. The gene-enzyme relationship requires modification when we consider that many enzymes are composed of more than one polypeptide chain, or subunit (that is, they have a quaternary structure). In this case, each polypeptide chain is specified by its own separate gene. Thus, it is more correct to speak of a one-gene, one-polypeptide hypothesis: The function of a gene is to control the production of a single, specific polypeptide. Much later, it was discovered that some genes code for forms of RNA that do not become translated into polypeptides, and that still other genes are involved in controlling which other DNA sequences are expressed. While these discoveries have overthrown the idea that all genes code for proteins, they did not invalidate the relationship between genes and polypeptides. 12.2 DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Information 220Now let us turn our attention to how a gene expresses itself as a polypeptide. This expression occurs in two steps. The first step, transcription, copies the information of a DNA sequence (the gene) into corresponding information in an RNA sequence. The second step, translation, converts this RNA information into an appropriate amino acid sequence in a polypeptide.12.2.1 RNA differs from DNA 220To understand the transcription and translation of genetic information, you need to understand the structure of RNA. RNA (ribonucleic acid) is a polynucleotide similar to DNA, but differs from DNA in three ways: RNA generally consists of only one polynucleotide strand [thus Chargaff's rule, G = C and A = T , is true only for DNA and not for RNA]. The sugar molecule found in RNA is ribose, rather than the deoxyribose found in DNA. Although three of the nitrogenous bases (adenine, guanine, and cytosine) in RNA are identical to those in DNA, the fourth base in RNA is uracil (U), which is similar to thymine but lacks the methyl (-CH group. RNA can base-pair with single-stranded DNA, and this pairing obeys the same hydrogen-bonding rules as in DNA, except that adenine pairs wth uracil instead of thymine. RNA can also fold over and base-pair with itself, as we will see with tRNA later in this chapter.12.2.2 Information flows in one direction when genes are expressed 220Francis Crick (of the Watson-Crick model) proposed what he called the central dogma of molecular biology. The central dogma is, simply, that DNA codes for the production of RNA (transcription), RNA codes for the production of protein (translation), and protein does not code for the production of protein, RNA, or DNA. In Crick's words, "once 'information' has passed into protein it cannot get out again." The central dogma posed two questions: How does genetic information get from the nucleus to the cytoplasm? (As you know, most of the DNA of a eukaryotic cell is confined to the nucleus, but proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm.) What is the relationship between a specific nucleotide sequence (in DNA) and a specific amino acid sequence (in a protein)? To answer the first question, Crick and his colleagues developed the messenger hypothesis, according to which an RNA molecule forms as a complementary copy of one DNA strand of a particular gene. The process by which this RNA forms is called transcription. If each such RNA molecule contains the information from a gene, there should be as many different kinds of RNA molecules as there are genes. This messenger RNA, or mRNA, then travels from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it serves as a template for the synthesis of proteins. To answer the second question, Crick proposed the adapter hypothesis: there must be an adapter molecule that can bind a specific amino acid at one end and recognize a sequence of nucleotides with another region. In due course, these adapters, called transfer RNA, or tRNA, were identified. Because they recognize the genetic message of mRNA and simultaneously carry specific amino acids, tRNA's can translate the language of DNA into the language of proteins. The tRNA adapters line up on the mRNA so that the amino acids are in the proper sequence for a growing polypeptide chain-a process called translation. Summarizing the main features of the central dogma, the messenger hypothesis, and the adapter hypothesis, we may say that a given gene is transcribed to produce a messenger RNA (mRNA) complementary to one of the DNA strands, and that transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules translate the sequence of bases in the mRNA into the appropriate sequence of amino acids.12.2.3 RNA viruses modify the central dogma 221According to the central dogma, DNA codes for RNA, and RNA codes for protein. All cellular organisms have DNA as their hereditary material. Only among viruses (which are not cellular) are variations on the central dogma found. Many viruses, such as the tobacco mosaic virus, influenza virus, and poliovirus, have RNA rather than DNA as their genetic material. With its nucleotide sequence, RNA could potentially act as an information carrier and be expressed as proteins. But since RNA is usually single-stranded, its replication is a problem. The viruses generally solve this problem by transcribing from RNA to RNA, making an RNA strand that is complementary to the genome. This "opposite" strand is used to make to make more copies of the genome by transcription. HIV and certain tumor viruses also have RNA as their genome, but do not replicate it as RNA-to-RNA. Instead, after infecting a host cell, they make a DNA copy of their genome, and use it to make more RNA. This RNA is then used both as genomes for more copies of the virus and as mRNA. Synthesis of DNA from RNA is the reverse of the usual route in transcription, and, not surprisingly, the enzyme that catalyzes this reaction is called reverse transcriptase. We will examine this process in more detail in the next chapter. 12.3 Transcription: DNA-Directed RNA Synthesis 222Transcription-the formation of a specific RNA from a specific DNA, requires the enzyme RNA polymerase. It also requires the appropriate ribonucleoside triphosphates (ATP, GTP, CTP, and UTP) and a DNA template. In a given region of DNA, such as a gene, only one of the strands-the template strand-is transcribed. The other, complementary DNA strand remains untranscribed. For different genes in the same DNA molecule, different strands may be transcribed. That is, the strand that is the complementary strand in one gene may be the template strand in another. Not only mRNA is produced by transcription. The same process is responsible for the synthesis of tRNA and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which constitutes a major fraction of the ribosomes. Like mRNA, these other forms of RNA are encoded by specific genes. In DNA replication, as we know, the two strands of the parent molecule unwind, and each strand serves as the template for a new strand. In transcription, DNA partly unwinds so that it can serve as a template for RNA synthesis. As the RNA transcript forms, it peels away, allowing the DNA that has already been transcribed to be rewound into the double helix. Transcription can be divided into three distinct processes: initiation, elongation, and termination. Let's consider each of these in turn.12.3.1 Initiation of transcription requires a promoter and an RNA polymerase 222 @The transcription of a gene begins at a promoter, a special sequence of DNA to which RNA polymerase binds very tightly. There is at least one promoter for each gene (or, in prokaryotes, each set of genes) to be transcribed into mRNA. Promoters serve as punctuation marks, telling the RNA polymerase where to start and which strand of DNA to read. A promoter, which is a specific sequence in the DNA that reads in a particular direction, orients the RNA polymerase and thus "aims" it at the correct strand to use as a template. Part of each promoter is the initiation site, where transcription begins. Farther toward the 3? end of the promoter lie groups of nucleotides that help the RNA polymerase bind. RNA polymerase moves in a 3?-to-5? direction along the template strand. Promoter sequences can be identified by scientists in the laboratory in several ways. For example, DNA can be chopped up into short stretches and presented to RNA polymerase in the test tube; sequences to which RNA polymerase binds tightly are promoters. Or, a promoter can be identified by a loss of function due to a change in its DNA sequence; in some cases, a single base-pair change results in a promoter that can no longer bind tightly to the RNA polymerase. Although every gene has a promoter, not all promoters are identical. One promoter may have a DNA sequence that binds RNA polymerase very effectively and therefore triggers frequent transcription of its gene; in other words, it competes effectively for the available RNA polymerase. Another promoter may bind the polymerase less well, and its genes will rarely be transcribed. We will consider prokaryotic promoters in more detail in Chapter 13 and eukaryotic promoters in Chapter 14. In addition, not all RNA polymerases are identical. Prokaryotes have a single RNA polymerase that produces mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA. Eukaryotes have three different RNA polymerases with distinct roles. Of these, RNA polymerase II is responsible for mRNA production. Initiation of transcription in eukaryotes differs from that in prokaryotes in another respect. As we will see in more detail in Chapter 14, eukaryotic RNA polymerases cannot bind to a promoter and start the process of transcription until other proteins bind to sites in the promoter and prepare a "docking site" for the RNA polymerase. The requirement for these proteins affords a way to regulate the transcription of particular genes.12.3.2 RNA polymerase elongates the transcript 222Once RNA polymerase has bound to the promoter, it unwinds the DNA about 20 base pairs at a time and reads the template strand in the 3?-to-5? direction. Like DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase adds new nucleotides to the 3? end of the growing strand. That is, the new RNA grows from its own 5? end to its 3? end. The RNA transcript is thus antiparallel to the DNA template strand. We indicated in the previous chapter that DNA replication occurs at fixed locations in the nucleus, with the DNA moving through a replication complex. While there is some evidence that this may be the case in DNA transcription to RNA as well, it is not as convincing as for DNA replication, so we will present the model of a "moving transcription complex" rather than a moving DNA molecule. Transcription, like DNA replication requires a lot of energy. Like replication, transcription draws on energy released by both the removal and the breakdown of the pyrophosphate group from each nucleotide added. Unlike DNA polymerases, RNA polymerases do not inspect and correct their work. Transcription errors occur at a rate of one mistake for every 104 to 105 bases. Because many copies of RNA are made, these errors are not as potentially harmful as mutations in DNA.12.3.3 Transcription terminates at particular base sequences 223What tells RNA polymerase to stop adding nucleotides to a growing transcript? Just as initiation sites specify the start of transcription, particular base sequences in the DNA specify its termination. The mechanisms of termination are complex and of more than one kind. For some genes, the newly formed transcript simply falls away from the DNA template and the RNA polymerase. For others, a helper protein pulls the transcript away. In prokaryotes, the translation of mRNA often begins (at the 5? end of the mRNA) before transcription of the mRNA molecule is complete. In eukaryotes, the situation is more complicated. First, there is a spatial separation of transcription (in the nucleus) and translation (in the cytoplasm). Second, the first product of transcription is a pre-mRNA that is longer than the final mRNA and must undergo considerable processing before it becomes the mRNA that can be translated. The advantages of this processing, and its mechanisms, will be discussed in Chapter 14. 12.4 The Genetic Code 223The genetic code provides the specificity for protein synthesis. You can think of the genetic information in an mRNA molecule as a series of sequential, nonoverlapping three-letter "words." Each sequence of three nucleotides (the three "letters") along the chain specifies a particular amino acid. Each three-letter "word" is called a codon. Each codon is complementary to the corresponding triplet in the DNA molecule from which it was transcribed. Notice that there are many more codons than there are different amino acids in proteins. Combinations of the four available "letters" (the bases) give 64 (4 different three-letter codons, yet these codons determine only 20 amino acids. AUG, which codes for methionine, is also the start codon, the initiation signal for translation. Three of the codons (UAA, UAG, UGA) are stop codons, or chain terminators; when the translation machinery reaches one of these codons, translation stops, and the polypeptide is released from the translation complex. After describing the properties of the genetic code, we will examine some of the scientific thinking and experimentation that went into deciphering it.12.4.1 The genetic code is redundant but not ambiguous 224After the start and stop codons, the remaining 60 codons are far more than enough to code for the other 19 amino acids-and indeed there are repeats. Thus we say that the genetic code is redundant; that is, an amino acid may be represented by more than one codon. The redundancy is not evenly divided among the amino acids. For example, methionine and tryptophan are represented by only one codon each, whereas leucine is represented by six different codons. The term redundancy should not be confused with ambiguity. To say that the code was ambiguous would mean that a single codon could specify either of two (or more) different amino acids; there would then be doubt whether to put in, say, leucine or something else. The genetic code is not ambiguous. Redundancy in the code means that there is more than one clear way to say, "Put leucine here." In other words, a given amino acid may be encoded by more than one codon, but a codon can code for only one amino acid. But just as people in different places prefer different ways of saying the same thing-"Good-bye!" "See you!" "Ciao!" and "So long!" have the same meaning-different organisms prefer one or another of the redundant codons. The genetic code appears to be nearly universal, applying to all the species on our planet. Thus the code must be an ancient one that has been maintained intact throughout the evolution of living things. Exceptions are known: Within mitochondria and chloroplasts, the code differs slightly from that in prokaryotes and in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells; in one group of protists, UAA and UAG code for glutamine rather than functioning as stop codons. The significance of these differences is not yet clear. What is clear is that the exceptions are few and slight. The common genetic code means that there is also a common language for evolution. As natural selection has resulted in one species replacing another, the raw material of genetic variation has remained the same: DNA sequences with the same "meaning." The common code also has great implications in genetic engineering, as we will see in Chapter 16, since it means that a human gene is in the same language as a bacterial gene. So the protein transcription and translation machinery of a bacterium can utilize genes from a human as well as its own genes. The master codons on the DNA strand that was transcribed to produce the mRNA are complementary and antiparallel to these codons. Thus, for example, 3?-AAA-5? in the template DNA strand corresponds to phenylalanine (which is coded for by the mRNA codon 5?-UUU-3?), and 3?ACC-5? in the template DNA corresponds to tryptophan (which is coded for by the mRNA codon 5?-UGG-3?).12.4.2 Biologists broke the genetic code by using artificial messengers 224 Molecular biologists broke the genetic code the early 1960s. The problem seemed difficult: How could more than 20 "code words" be written with an "alphabet" consisting of only four "letters"? How, in other words, could four bases code for 20 or so different amino acids? That the code was a triplet code, based on three-letter codons, was considered likely. With only four letters (A, G, C, U), a one-letter code clearly could not unambiguously encode 20 amino acids; it could encode only four of them. A two-letter code could contain only 4 ? 4 = 16 codons-still not enough. But a triplet code could contain up to 4 ??4 ? 4 = 64 codons. Marshall Nirenberg and J. H. Matthaei, at the National Institutes of Health, made the first decoding breakthrough in 1961 when they realized that they could use a very simple artificial polynucleotide instead of a complex natural mRNA as a messenger. They could then identify the polypeptide that the artificial messenger encoded. Nirenberg prepared an artificial mRNA in which all the bases were uracil (poly U). When poly U was added to a test tube containing all the ingredients necessary for protein synthesis (ribosomes, amino acids, activating enzymes, tRNA's, and other factors), a polypeptide formed. This polypeptide contained only one kind of amino acid: phenylalanine (Phe). Poly U coded for poly Phe! Accordingly, UUU appeared to be the mRNA code word-the codon-for phenylalanine. Following up on this success, Nirenberg and Matthaei soon showed that CCC codes for proline and AAA for lysine. (Poly G presented some chemical problems and was not tested initially.) UUU, CCC, and AAA were three of the easiest codons; different approaches were required to work out the rest. Other scientists later found that simple artificial mRNA's only three nucleotides long-each amounting to a codon-could bind to a ribosome, and that the resulting complex could then cause the binding of the corresponding tRNA covalently bound to its specific amino acid. Thus, for example, simple UUU causes the tRNA charged with phenylalanine to bind to the ribosome. After this discovery, complete deciphering of the genetic code was relatively simple. To find the "translation" of a codon, Nirenberg could use a sample of that codon as an artificial mRNA and see which amino acid became bound to it. 12.5 Preparation for Translation: Linking RNA's, Amino Acids, and Ribosomes 225How is the information contained in mRNA translated into proteins? Recall that Crick proposed that there is an adapter, something that can recognize the information in an mRNA codon and also bind the amino acid specified by the codon. That adapter is tRNA. Translation occurs at ribosomes, which are molecular protein-synthesizing machines that hold the mRNA and tRNA's in place. In prokaryotes, ribosomes bind to mRNA as it is made, coupling the processes of transcription and translation. In eukaryotes, mRNA leaves the nucleus and is bound to ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Two key events must take place to ensure that the protein made is the one specified by mRNA: tRNA must read mRNA correctly. tRNA must carry the amino acid that is correct for its reading of the mRNA. At first glance, these two events seem similar, but they are quite distinct, as you will see.12.5.1 Transfer RNA's carry specific amino acids and bind to specific codons 225The codon in mRNA and the amino acid in a protein are related by way of an adapter-a specific tRNA. For each of the 20 amino acids, there is at least one specific type of tRNA molecule. The structure of the tRNA molecule relates clearly to its functions: It carries amino acids, it associates with mRNA molecules, and it interacts with ribosomes. A tRNA molecule has about 75 to 80 nucleotides. It has a three-dimensional shape that is maintained by complementary base pairing and hydrogen bonding within its own sequence. At the 3? end of every tRNA molecule is a site to which its specific amino acid binds covalently. At about the midpoint is a group of three bases, called the anticodon, that constitutes the point of contact with mRNA. Each tRNA species has a unique anticodon, which is complementary to the mRNA codon for that tRNA's amino acid. The codon and the anticodon unite by complementary base pairing  and hydrogen bonding. At contact, they are antiparallel to each other. As an example of this process, consider the amino acid arginine: The DNA coding region for arginine is 3?-GCC-5?, which is transcribed, by base pairing, to; the mRNA codon 5?-CGG-3?, which binds to; a tRNA with an anticodon 3?-GCC-5?. Recall that 61 different codons encode the 20 amino acids in proteins. Does this mean that the cell must produce 61 different tRNA species, each with a different anticodon? No. The cell gets by with about two-thirds that number of tRNA species, because the specificity for the base at the 3? end of the codon (and the 5? end of the anticodon) is not always strictly observed. This phenomenon, called wobble, allows the alanine codons GCA, GCC, and GCU all to be recognized by the same tRNA. Wobble is allowed in some matches but not in others; of most importance, it does not allow the genetic code to be ambiguous! The three-dimensional shape of tRNAs  allows them to combine specifically with binding sites on ribosomes. The structure of tRNA molecules relates clearly to their functions: They carry amino acids, associate with mRNA molecules, and interact with ribosomes.12.5.2 Activating enzymes link the right tRNA's and amino acids 226How does a tRNA molecule combine with the correct amino acid for the codon it recognizes? A family of activating enzymes, known more formally as aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, accomplishes this task. Each activating enzyme is specific for one amino acid and for its tRNA. The enzyme has a three-part active site that recognizes three smaller molecules: a specific amino acid, ATP, and a specific tRNA. The enzyme reacts with tRNA and an amino acid in two steps: enzyme + ATP + AA ? enzyme-AMP-AA + PPi; enzyme-AMP-AA + tRNA ? enzyme + AMP + tRNA-AA. The amino acid is attached to the 3??end (a free OH group on the ribose) of tRNA with a high-energy bond, forming charged tRNA. This bond will provide the energy for the synthesis of the peptide bond that will join adjacent amino acids. A clever experiment by Seymour Benzer and his colleagues at the California Institute of Technology showed the importance of the specificity of the attachment of tRNA to its amino acid. The amino acid cysteine, already properly attached to its tRNA, was chemically modified to become a different amino acid, alanine. Which component-the amino acid or the tRNA-would be recognized when this hybrid charged tRNA was put into a protein-synthesizing system? The answer was: The tRNA: Everywhere in the synthesized protein where cysteine was supposed to be, alanine appeared instead. The cysteine-specific tRNA delivered its cargo (alanine) to every address where cysteine was called for. This experiment showed that the protein synthesis machinery recognizes the tRNA part of charged tRNA, not the amino acid part. If activating enzymes in nature did what Benzer did in the laboratory and put the wrong amino acids on tRNA's, those amino acids would be inserted into proteins at inappropriate places, leading to alterations in protein shape and function. The fact that the activating enzymes are highly specific has led to the process of linking tRNA and amino acid being called the "second genetic code."12.5.3 The ribosome is the staging area for translation 226Ribosomes are required for the translation of the genetic information in mRNA into a polypeptide chain. Although ribosomes are the smallest cellular organelles, their mass of several million daltons makes them large in comparison with charged tRNA's. Each ribosome consists of two subunits, a large one and a small one. In eukaryotes, the large subunit consists of three different molecules of rRNA  and about 45 different protein molecules, arranged in a precise pattern. The small subunit consists of one rRNA molecule and 33 different protein molecules. When not active in the translation of mRNA, the ribosomes exist as separated subunits. The ribosomes of prokaryotes are somewhat smaller than those of eukaryotes, and their ribosomal proteins and RNA's are different. Mitochondria and chloroplasts also contain ribosomes, some of which are even smaller than those of prokaryotes. The different proteins and RNA's in a subunit are held together by ionic and hydrophobic forces, not covalent bonds. If these forces are disrupted by detergents, for example, the proteins and rRNA's separate from each other. When the detergent is removed, the entire complex structure self-assembles. This is like separating the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle and having them fit together again without human hands to guide them! A given ribosome is not specifically adapted to produce just one kind of protein. A ribosome can combine with any mRNA and all tRNA's, and thus can be used to make different polypeptide products. The mRNA contains the information that specifies the polypeptide sequence; the ribosome is simply the molecular factory where the task is accomplished. Its structure enables it to hold the mRNA and tRNA's in the right positions, thus allowing the growing polypeptide to be assembled efficiently. On the large subunit of the ribosome there are four sites to which tRNA binds. A tRNA traverses these four sites in order: The T site is where a tRNA carrying an amino acid first lands on the ribosome, accompanied by a special protein "escort" called the T, or transfer, factor. The A site is where the tRNA anticodon binds to mRNA codon, thus lining up the correct amino acid to be added to the growing polypeptide chain. The P site is where the tRNA adds its amino acid to the growing polypeptide chain. The E (exit) site is where tRNA, having given up its amino acid, resides before leaving the ribosome and going back to the cytosol to pick up another amino acid and begin the process again. Because codon-anticodon interactions and peptide bond formation occur at the A and P sites, we will describe their function in detail in the next section. 12.6 Translation: RNA-Directed Polypeptide Synthesis 228We have been working our way through the steps by which the sequence of bases in the template strand of a DNA molecule specifies the sequence of amino acids in a protein. We are now at the last step: translation, the RNA-directed assembly of a protein. Like transcription, translation occurs in three steps: initiation, elongation, and termination.12.6.1 Translation begins with an initiation complex 228The translation of mRNA begins with the formation of an initiation complex, which consists of a charged tRNA, bearing what will be the first amino acid of the polypeptide chain, and a small ribosomal subunit, both bound to the mRNA 1. The small ribosomal subunit binds to a sequence that it recognizes on the mRNA. This sequence is "upstream" (toward the 5? end) of the actual start codon that begins translation. Recall that the start codon in the genetic code is AUG. Thus the first amino acid in the chain is always methionine. The anticodon of a methionine-charged tRNA binds to the mRNA start codon by complementary base pairing. (Not all mature proteins have methionine as their N-terminal amino acid, however. In many cases, the initiator methionine is later removed by an enzyme.) After the methionine-charged tRNA has bound to the mRNA, the large subunit of the ribosome joins the complex. The charged tRNA, bearing methionine, now lies in the P site of the ribosome, and the A site is aligned with the second codon. How are all these ingredients-mRNA, two ribosomal subunits, and methionine-charged tRNA-put together properly? A group of proteins called initiation factors help direct the process, using GTP as an energy supply.12.6.2 The polypeptide elongates from the N terminus 229During translation, the ribosome moves along the mRNA in the 5?-to-3? direction 1. A charged tRNA whose anticodon is complementary to the second codon on the mRNA enters the open A site of the large ribosomal subunit. The large subunit then catalyzes two reactions, collectively called peptidyl transferase activity: breakage of the bond between the tRNA in the P site and its amino acid; peptide bond formation between this amino acid and the one attached to the tRNA in the A site. In this way, methionine (the amino acid in the P site) becomes the N terminus of the new protein. The second amino acid is now bound to methionine, but remains attached to its tRNA by its carboxyl group (-COOH) in the A site. What catalyzes this binding? In 1992, Harry Noller and his colleagues at the University of California at Santa Cruz found that if they removed almost all the proteins in the large ribosomal subunit, it still catalyzed peptide bond formation. But if the rRNA was destroyed, so was peptidyl transferase activity. Part of the rRNA in the large subunit interacts with the end of the charged tRNA where the amino acid is attached. Thus rRNA appears to be part of the catalyst. The idea that RNA-instead of the usual enzymes-can act as a catalyst, or ribozyme, was surprising, but is not so far-fetched. Because of its base-pairing ability, RNA can fold into three-dimensional shapes  and bind substrates, just as protein-based enzymes do.12.6.3 Elongation continues and the polypeptide grows 229After the first tRNA releases its methionine, it dissociates from the ribosome, returning to the cytosol to become charged with another methionine. The second tRNA, now bearing a dipeptide, shifts to the P site of the ribosome, which moves along the mRNA by another codon. Energy for this movement comes from the hydrolysis of another molecule of GTP. The elongation process continues, and the polypeptide chain grows, as the steps are repeated: The next charged tRNA enters the open A site. Its amino acid forms a peptide bond with the one in the P site, so that it picks up the growing polypeptide chain from the tRNA in the P site. The tRNA in the P site is released. The ribosome shifts one codon, so that the entire tRNA- polypeptide complex, along with its codon, moves to the newly vacated P site. All these steps are assisted by proteins called elongation factors.12.6.4 A release factor terminates translation 229How does the elongation cycle end? When a stop codon-UAA, UAG, or UGA-enters the A site, translation terminates 1. These codons encode no amino acids, nor do they bind any tRNA. Rather, they bind a protein release factor, which causes a water molecule instead of an amino acid to attach to the forming protein. The newly completed protein thereupon separates from the ribosome. Its C terminus is the last amino acid to join the chain. Its N terminus, at least initially, is methionine, as a consequence of the AUG start codon. In its amino acid sequence, it contains information for its three-dimensional shape, as well as its ultimate cellular destination. 12.7 Regulation of Translation 230Like any factory, the machinery of translation can work at varying rates. For example, externally applied chemicals, such as some antibiotics, can stop translation, as we saw in the opening of this chapter. Conversely, the presence of more than one ribosome on an mRNA can speed up protein synthesis.12.7.1 Some antibiotics work by inhibiting translation 230Antibiotics are defense molecules produced by microorganisms such as certain bacteria and fungi. These substances often destroy other microbes, which might compete with the defender for nutrients. Since the 1940s, scientists have isolated increasing numbers of antibiotics, and physicians use them to treat a great variety of infectious diseases, ranging from bacterial meningitis to pneumonia to gonorrhea. The key to the medical use of antibiotics is specificity: An antibiotic must work to destroy the microbial invader, but not harm the human host. One way in which antibacterial antibiotics accomplish this task is to block the synthesis of the bacterial cell wall, something that is essential to the microbe but that is not part of human biochemistry. Penicillin works in this fashion. Another way in which antibiotics work is to inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. Recall that the bacterial ribosome is smaller, and has a different collection of proteins, than the eukaryotic ribosome. Some antibiotics bind only to bacterial ribosomal proteins that are important in protein synthesis. Without the ability to make proteins, the bacterial invaders die, and the infection is stemmed.12.7.2 Polysome formation increases the rate of protein synthesis 230Several ribosomes can work simultaneously at translating a single mRNA molecule, producing multiple molecules of the protein at the same time. As soon as the first ribosome has moved far enough from the initiation point, a second initiation complex can form, then a third, and so on. An assemblage consisting of a thread of mRNA with its beadlike ribosomes and their growing polypeptide chains is called a polyribosome, or polysome 1. Cells that are actively synthesizing proteins contain large numbers of polysomes and few free ribosomes or ribosomal subunits. A polysome is like a cafeteria line, in which patrons follow each other, adding items to their trays. At any moment, the person at the start has a little food (a newly initiated protein); the person at the end has a complete meal (a completed protein). However, in the polysome cafeteria, everyone gets the same meal: many copies of the same protein are made from a single mRNA. 12.8 Posttranslational Events 231The functional protein that results from protein synthesis is not necessarily the same as the polypeptide chain that is released from the ribosome. Especially in eukaryotic cells, the polypeptide may need to be moved far from the site of synthesis in the cytoplasm, to an organelle, or even secreted from the cell. In addition, the polypeptide is often modified by the addition of new chemical groups that have functional significance. In this section, we examine these two posttranslational aspects of protein synthesis.12.8.1 Chemical signals in proteins direct them to their cellular destination 231As a polypeptide chain forms on the ribosome, it spontaneously folds into its three-dimensional shape. As described in Chapter 3, this shape is determined by the particular sequence of the amino acids that make up the protein, as well as factors such as the polarity and charge of their R groups. Ultimately, this shape allows the polypeptide to interact with other molecules in the cell, such as a substrate or another polypeptide. In addition to this structural information, the amino acid sequence contains an "address label" indicating where in the cell the polypeptide belongs. All protein synthesis begins on free ribosomes in the cytoplasm. As a polypeptide chain is made, the information contained in its amino acid sequence gives it one of two sets of instructions 1: Finish translation and be released to the cytoplasm. Such proteins are sent to the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, or peroxisomes, depending on the address in their instructions, or, lacking such specific instructions, remain in the cytoplasm. Stop translation, go to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and finish synthesis there. Such proteins are sent to the lysosomes (via the Golgi apparatus), the plasma membrane, instructed to remain in the ER, or, lacking  such specific instructions, are secreted from the cell. After translation, some folded polypeptides have a short exposed sequence of amino acids that acts like a postal "zip code," directing it to an organelle. These signal sequences are either at the N terminus or in the interior of the amino acid chain. For example, the following sequence is a nuclear localization signal: -pro-pro-lys-lys-lys-arg-lys-val-. This amino acid sequence occurs, for example, in histone proteins, but not in citric acid cycle enzymes, which are addressed to the mitochondria. The signal sequences have a conformation that allows them to bind to specific receptor proteins, appropriately called docking proteins, on the outer membrane of the appropriate organelle. Once the protein has bound to it, the receptor forms a channel in the membrane, allowing the protein to pass through to its organelle destination (it is usually unfolded by a chaperonin so that it can pass through the channel).If a specific hydrophobic sequence of about 25 amino acids occurs at the beginning of a polypeptide chain, the finished product is destined for the ER, lysosomes, and plasma membrane, or for secretion.  The signal sequence attaches to a signal recognition particle composed of protein and RNA 1. This attachment blocks further protein synthesis until the ribosome can become attached to a specific receptor protein in the membrane of the ER. Once again, the receptor protein becomes a channel through which the growing polypeptide passes, either into the ER membrane itself or into the interior of the ER. An enzyme within the ER interior then removes the signal sequence from the polypeptide chain. At this point, protein synthesis resumes, and the chain grows longer. From the ER, the newly formed protein can be transported to its appropriate location-to other cellular compartments or to the outside of the cell-without mixing with other molecules in the cytoplasm. Additional signals are needed for sorting the protein further (remember that its ER signal sequence has been removed). These signals are of two kinds. Some are sequences of amino acids that allow the protein's retention within the ER. Others are sugars added in the Golgi apparatus, to which the protein is transferred from the ER; the resulting glycoproteins end up either at the plasma membrane or in a lysosome (or plant vacuole), depending on which sugars are added. Proteins with no signals pass from the ER through the Golgi apparatus and are secreted from the cell. It is important to emphasize that the addressing of a protein to its destination is a property of its amino acid sequence, and so is genetically determined. An example of what can go wrong if a gene for protein targeting is mutated is mucoplidosis II, or I-cell disease. People with this disease lack an essential enzyme for the formation of the lysosomal targeting signal. So proteins destined for their lysosomes never get there, and instead either stay in the Golgi (where they form I, or inclusion, bodies) or are secreted from the cell. The inability to perform normal lysosome functions leads to progressive illness and death in childhood.12.8.2 Many proteins are modified after translation 233It is the exception and not the rule that the finished protein product is identical to the polypeptide chain translated from mRNA on the ribosomes. Instead, most polypeptides are modified after translation, both covalently and noncovalently. In both cases, the modifications are essential to the final functioning of the protein. Some kinds of covalent changes include the following 1: Proteolysis is the cutting of a polypeptide chain. Cleavage of the signal sequence from the growing polypeptide chain in the ER is an example of proteolysis; the protein might go back out of the ER through the membrane channel if the signal sequence were not cut off. Some proteins are actually made from polyproteins (long polypeptides) that are cut into final products by enzymes called proteases. Viruses such as HIV encode such proteases, which are essential because the large viral polyprotein cannot fold properly unless it is cut. Certain drugs used to treat AIDS work by inhibiting HIV's protease. Glycosylation involves the addition of sugars to proteins. In both the ER and the Golgi, resident enzymes catalyze the addition of various sugar residues or short sugar chains to certain amino acid R groups on proteins as they pass through. One type of "sugar coating" is essential for addressing proteins to lysosomes, as we saw above. Other types are important in the three-dimensional structure and recognition of proteins at the cell surface. Still others help in stabilizing proteins stored in storage vacuoles in plant seeds. Phosphorylation is the addition of phosphate groups to proteins and is catalyzed by protein kinases. These charged groups change the three-dimensional structures of targeted proteins, often exposing an active site of an enzyme, or a binding site for another protein-as we will see in Chapter 15. 12.9 Mutations: Heritable Changes in Genes 
Accurate DNA replication, transcription, and translation all depend on the reliable pairing of complementary bases. Errors occur, though infrequently, in all three processes. Errors happen least often in DNA replication. However, the consequences of those errors can be most severe because only they are heritable. Mutations are heritable changes in genetic information. In unicellular organisms, any mutations that occur are passed on to the daughter cells  when the cell divides. In multicellular organisms, there are two general types of mutations in terms of inheritance: Somatic mutations are those that occur in non-gamete body cells. These mutations are passed on to the daughter cells after mitosis, and to the offspring of these cells in turn. A mutation in a single skin cell, for example, could result in a patch of skin cells, all with the same DNA alteration. Germ-line mutations are those that occur in the cells that give rise to gametes. A gamete with the mutation passes it on to a new organism at fertilization. Very small changes in the genetic material often lead to easily observable changes in the phenotype. Some effects of mutations in humans are readily detectable-dwarfism, for instance, or the presence of more than five fingers on each hand. A mutant genotype in a microorganism may be obvious if, for example, it results in a change in nutritional requirements, as we described for Neurospora above. Other mutations may be unobservable. In humans, for example, a particular mutation drastically lowers the level of an enzyme called glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase that is present in many tissues, including red blood cells. The red blood cells of a person carrying the mutant allele are abnormally sensitive to an antimalarial drug called primaquine; when such people are treated with this drug, their red blood cells rupture, causing serious medical problems. People with the normal allele have no such problem. Before the drug came into use, no one was aware that such a mutation existed. Similarly, distinguishing a mutant bacterium from a normal bacterium may require sophisticated chemical methods, not just visual inspection.
Some mutations cause their phenotypes only under certain restrictive conditions and are not detectable under other, permissive conditions. We call organisms carrying such mutations conditional mutants. Many conditional mutants are temperature-sensitive, able to grow normally at a permissive temperature-say, 30¡C-but unable to grow at a higher restrictive temperature-say, 37¡C. The mutant allele in such an organism may code for an enzyme with an unstable tertiary structure that is altered at the restrictive temperature. All mutations are alterations in the nucleotide sequence of DNA. We divide mutations into two categories: Point mutations are mutations of single genes: One allele becomes another because of small alterations in the sequence or number of nucleotides-even as small as the substitution of one nucleotide for another. Chromosomal mutations are more extensive alterations. They may change the position or direction of a DNA segment without actually removing any genetic information, or they may cause a segment of DNA to be irretrievably lost.12.9.1 Point mutations are changes in single bases 234Point mutations result from the addition or subtraction of a nucleotide base, or the substitution of one base for another, in the DNA, and hence in the mRNA. Point mutations can be caused by errors in chromosome replication that are not corrected by proofreading, or by environmental mutagens such as chemicals and radiation. Because of the redundancy of the genetic code, some point mutations result in no change in amino acids when the altered mRNA is translated; for this reason they are called silent mutations. For example, four mRNA codons code for the amino acid proline: CCA, CCC, CCU, and CCG. If the template strand of DNA has the sequence CGG, it will be transcribed to CCG in mRNA, and proline-charged tRNA will bind at the ribosome. But if there is a mutation in the DNA such that the codon in the template DNA now reads AGG, the mRNA codon will be CCU-and the tRNA that binds will still carry proline. Silent mutations are quite common, and account for genetic diversity that is not expressed as phenotypic differences. In contrast to silent mutations, some base substitution mutations may change the genetic message such that one amino acid substitutes for another in the protein. A specific example of a missense mutation is the sickle-cell allele for human ?-globin. Sickle-cell anemia results from a defect in hemoglobin, a protein that carries oxygen. The gene for ?-globin, one of the polypeptides in hemoglobin, differs by one amino acid between the normal and the sickle-cell allele. Persons who are homozygous for this recessive allele have defective red blood cells. Where oxygen is abundant, as in the lungs, the cells are normal in structure and function. But at the low oxygen levels characteristic of working muscles, the red blood cells collapse into the shape of a sickle.A missense mutation may sometimes cause a protein not to function, but often the effect is only to reduce the functional efficiency of the protein. Therefore, individuals carrying missense mutations may survive, even though the affected protein is essential to life. Through evolution, some missense mutations even improve functional efficiency. Nonsense mutations, another type of mutation in which bases are substituted, are more often disruptive than are missense mutations. In a nonsense mutation, the base substitution causes a chain terminator (stop) codon, such as UAG, to form in the mRNA product. The result is a shortened protein product, since translation does not proceed beyond the point where the mutation occurred. Not all point mutations are base substitutions. Single base pairs may be inserted into or deleted from DNA. Such mutations are known as frame-shift mutations because they interfere with the decoding of the genetic message by throwing it out of register. Think again of codons as three-letter words, each corresponding to a particular amino acid. Translation proceeds codon by codon; if a base is added to the message or subtracted from it, translation proceeds perfectly until it comes to the one-base insertion or deletion. From that point on, the three-letter words in the message are one letter out of register. In other words, such mutations shift the "reading frame" of the genetic message. Frame-shift mutations almost always lead to the production of nonfunctional proteins.12.9.2 Chromosomal mutations are extensive changes in the genetic material 235DNA molecules can break and rejoin, grossly disrupting the sequence of genetic information. There are four types of such chromosomal mutations: deletions, duplications, inversions, and translocations 1. These mutations can be caused by severe damage to chromosomes resulting from chemical or radiation exposure or by drastic errors in chromosome replication. Deletions remove part of the genetic material. Like frame-shift point mutations, their consequences can be severe unless they affect unnecessary genes or are masked by the presence, in the same cell, of normal alleles of the deleted genes. It is easy to imagine one mechanism that could produce deletions: A DNA molecule might break at two points, and the two end pieces might rejoin, leaving out the DNA between the breaks. Another mechanism by which deletion mutations might arise would lead simultaneously to the production of a second kind of chromosomal mutation: a duplication. Duplication would arise if homologous chromosomes broke at different positions and then reconnected to the wrong partners. One of the two molecules produced by this mechanism would lack a segment of DNA (it would have a deletion), and the other would have two copies (a duplication) of the segment that was deleted from the first.Breaking and rejoining can also lead to inversion-the removal of a segment of DNA and its reinsertion into the same location, but "flipped" end over end so that it runs in the opposite direction. If an inversion includes part of a segment of DNA that codes for a protein, the resulting protein will be drastically altered and almost certainly nonfunctional. The fourth type of chromosomal mutation, called translocation, results when a segment of DNA breaks off, moves from a chromosome, and is inserted into a different chromosome. Translocations may be reciprocal, or nonreciprocal, as the mutation involving duplication and deletion. Translocations can make synapsis in meiosis difficult and thus sometimes lead to aneuploidy (a lack or excess of chromosomes.12.9.3 Mutations can be spontaneous or induced 236Spontaneous mutations are permanent changes in the genome that occur without any outside influence. In other words, they occur simply because the machinery of the cell is imperfect. They may occur by several mechanisms. The four nucleotide bases are somewhat unstable and can exist in two different forms (called tautomers), one of which is commonly found and one rare. When a base temporarily forms its unusual tautomer, it can pair with a different base. For example, C normally pairs with G. But if C is in its rare form at the time of DNA replication, it pairs with (and DNA polymerase will insert) A. So there is a mutation of G ? A. DNA polymerase makes errors in replication; for example, inserting a T opposite a G. Most of these errors are repaired by the proofreading function of the replication complex, but some errors escape and become permanent. Meiosis is not perfect. Nondisjunction can occur, leading to one too many or one too few chromosomes (aneuploidy). Random chromosome breaks and rejoining among nonhomologous chromatids can occur, leading to translocations. Induced mutations occur when some outside agent causes a permanent change in DNA: Some chemicals can covalently alter the nucleotide bases. For example, nitrous acid and its relatives can turn cytosine in DNA into uracil by deamination: it converts an amino group on cytosine (-NH into a keto group (-C;dbO). This changes the base pairing properties: C still pairs with G, but when U is present, DNA polymerase inserts and A. Other chemicals add groups to the bases. For instance, benzpyrene, a component of cigarette smoke, adds a large chemical group to guanine, making it unavailable for base pairing. When DNA polymerase reaches such a modified guanine, it inserts any of the four bases; of course, three-fourths of the time the base will not be cytosine, and a mutation results. Radiation damages the genetic material in two ways. Ionizing radiation (X rays) produces highly reactive chemical species called free radicals, which can change bases in DNA to unrecognizable (by DNA polymerase) forms or break the sugar-phosphate backbone, causing chromosomal abnormalities. Ultraviolet radiation from the sun (or a tanning lamp) is absorbed by thymine in DNA, causing it to form interstrand covalent bonds with adjacent nucleotides. This too creates havoc with DNA replication. Mutations have both benefits and costs. Mutations provide genetic diversity for evolution to work on, as we will see below. But they can also produce an organism that does poorly in its environment. An additional cost of mutations is that they can occur in non-gametes. Such somatic mutations can lead to cancer. We will return to the effects of germ-line and somatic mutations in humans in Chapter 18.12.9.4 Mutations are the raw material of evolution 236Without mutation, there would be no evolution. As we will see in Part Three of this book, mutation does not drive evolution, but it provides the genetic diversity on which natural selection and other agents of evolution act. All mutations are rare events, but mutation frequencies vary from organism to organism and from gene to gene within a given organism. The frequency of mutation is usually much lower than one mutation per 104 genes per DNA duplication, and sometimes as low as one mutation per 109 genes per duplication. Most mutations are point mutations in which one nucleotide is substituted for another during the synthesis of a new DNA strand.Mutations can harm the organism that carries them, or be neutral (have no effect on the organism's ability to survive or produce offspring). Once in a while, however, a mutation improves an organism's adaptation to its environment, or becomes favorable when environmental variables change.  Most of the complex creatures living on Earth have more DNA, and therefore more genes, than the simpler creatures do. Humans, for example, have 1,000 times more genetic material than prokaryotes have. How did these new genes arise? If whole genes were sometimes duplicated by the mechanisms described in the previous section, the bearer of the duplication would have a surplus of genetic information that might be turned to good use. Subsequent mutations in one of the two copies of the gene might not have an adverse effect on survival, because the other copy of the gene would continue to produce functional protein. The extra gene might mutate over and over again without ill effect because its original function would be fulfilled by the original copy. If the random accumulation of mutations in the extra gene led to the production of a useful protein (for example, an enzyme with an altered specificity for the substrates it binds, allowing it to catalyze different-but related-reactions), natural selection would tend to perpetuate the existence of this new gene. New copies of genes may also arise through the activity of transposable elements, which are discussed in Chapters 13 and 14.13 The Genetics of Viruses and ProkaryotesJanet, a member of her university's cross-country team, entered the hospital just after final exams for some long-delayed surgery on a tendon in her knee. The tendon repair went well, but she left the hospital with something new: bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa had infected the surgical wounds. The antibiotics typically used to kill these bacteria did not work. She ended up back in the hospital two weeks later, where she received intensive antibiotic therapy and ultimately recovered. Janet developed what is called a nosocomial infection-an infection acquired as a result of a hospital stay. Why would a hospital, which we think of as a place to get better, sometimes-in fact, for about 10 percent of all patients-be a place where we get sick? Of course, the stresses of Janet's surgery could have reduced her immunity to the bacteria that are common everywhere in our environment. Increasingly, however, the heavy use of antibiotics in hospitals makes them breeding grounds for bacteria that have genes for resistance to those antibiotics. How have bacteria acquired antibiotic resistance so rapidly, and how do they pass that acquired resistance along to other bacteria? The answer involves some DNA sequences called R factors. But before we can discuss these remarkable pieces of DNA, we must introduce the genetics of prokaryotes. Prokaryotes usually reproduce asexually by cell division, but can acquire new genes in several ways. These range from simple recombination in a sexual process to using infective viruses as carriers for prokaryotic genes. We also describe how the expression of prokaryotic genes is regulated, and what DNA sequencing has revealed about the prokaryotic genome. Viruses are not prokaryotes. In fact, they are not even cells, but intracellular parasites that can reproduce only within living cells. We begin this chapter by examining the structures, classification, reproduction, and genetics of viruses. 13.1 Using Prokaryotes and Viruses to Probe the Nature of Genes 239Prokaryotes such as Escherichia coli and the viruses that infect them have been important tools in discovering the structure, function, and transmission of genes, as we saw in Chapter 11. What are the advantages of working with prokaryotes and viruses? First, it is easier to work with small amounts of DNA than with large amounts. A typical bacterium contains about  a thousandth as much DNA as a single human cell, and a typical bacterial virus contains about a hundredth as much DNA as a bacterium. Second, data on large numbers of individuals can be obtained easily from prokaryotes. A single milliliter of medium can contain more than 109 E coli cells or 1011 bacteriophages. In addition, most prokaryotes grow rapidly. A culture of E coli can be grown under conditions that allow their numbers to double every 20 minutes. By contrast, 109 mice would cost more than 109 dollars, and would require a cage that would cover about 3 square miles. Growth of a generation of mice takes about 3 months, not 20 minutes. Third, prokaryotes and viruses are usually haploid, which makes genetic analyses easier. The ease of growing and handling bacteria and their viruses permitted the explosion of genetics and molecular biology that began shortly after the mid-twentieth century. Their relative biological simplicity contributed immeasurably to discoveries about the genetic material, the replication of DNA, and the mechanisms of gene expression. Later, they were the first subjects of recombinant DNA technology.Questions of interest to all biologists continue to be studied in prokaryotes, and prokaryotes continue to be important tools for biotechnology and for research on eukaryotes. Prokaryotes are important players in the environment, performing much of the cycling of elements in the atmosphere and water. And, as we saw at the opening of this chapter, infectious diseases caused by prokaryotes and viruses continue to challenge humankind. 13.2 Viruses: Reproduction and Recombination 240Although there are many kinds of viruses, most of them are composed of nothing but nucleic acid and a few proteins. Most viruses have relatively simple means of infecting their host cells. Some can infect a cell but postpone reproduction, lying low in the host chromosome until conditions are favorable. The simplest infective agents of all are  viroids, which are made up only of genetic material.13.2.1 Scientists studied viruses before they could see them 240Most viruses are much smaller than most bacteria (Table 13.. Viruses have become well understood only within the last half century, but the first step on this path of discovery was taken by the Russian botanist Dmitri Ivanovsky in 1892. He was trying to find the cause of tobacco mosaic disease, which results in the destruction of photosynthetic tissues and can devastate a tobacco crop. Ivanovsky passed an extract of diseased tobacco leaves through a fine porcelain filter, a technique that had been used previously by physicians and veterinarians to isolate disease-causing bacteria. To Ivanovsky's surprise, the disease agent in this case did not stick to the filter: It passed through, and the liquid filtrate still caused tobacco mosaic disease. But instead of concluding that the agent was smaller than a bacterium, he assumed that his filter was faulty. Pasteur's recent demonstration that bacteria could cause disease was the dominant idea at the time, and Ivanovsky chose not to challenge it. But, as often happens in science, someone soon came along who did. In 1898, Martinus Beijerinck repeated Ivanovsky's experiment, and also showed that the tiny tobacco mosaic agent could diffuse through an agar gel. He called the agent "contagium vivum fluidum," which later became shortened to virus. Almost 40 years later, the infective agent was crystallized by Wendell Stanley (who won the Nobel Prize for his efforts). The crystalline viral preparation became infectious again when it was dissolved. It was soon shown that crystallized viral preparations consist of protein and nucleic acid. Finally, direct observation of viruses with electron microscopes in the 1950s showed clearly how much they differ from bacteria and other organisms13.2.2 Viruses reproduce only with the help of living cells 240Unlike the organisms that make up the six taxonomic kingdoms of the living world, viruses are acellular; that is, they are not cells and do not consist of cells. Unlike cellular creatures, viruses do not metabolize energy-they neither produce ATP nor conduct fermentation, cellular respiration, or photosynthesis. Whole viruses never arise directly from preexisting viruses. Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites; that is, they develop and reproduce only within the cells of specific hosts. The cells of animals, plants, fungi, protists, and prokaryotes (both bacteria and archaea) serve as hosts to viruses. When they reproduce, viruses usually destroy the host cell, releasing progeny viruses that then seek new hosts. Many diseases of humans, animals, and plants are caused by viruses. Because they lack the distinctive cell wall and ribosomal biochemistry of bacteria, viruses are not affected by antibiotics. Viruses outside of host cells exist as individual particles called virions. The virion, the basic unit of a virus, consists of a central core of either DNA or RNA (but not both) surrounded by a capsid, or coat, composed of one or more proteins. The way in which these proteins assemble gives the virion a characteristic shape. In addition, many animal viruses have a lipid and protein membrane acquired from host cell plasma membranes. Many bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) have specialized "tails" made of protein.13.2.3 There are many kinds of viruses 241A common way to classify viruses separates them by whether their genetic material is DNA or RNA, and then by whether their nucleic acid is single-stranded or double-stranded. Some RNA viruses have more than one molecule of RNA, and the DNA of one virus family is circular. Further levels of classification depend on factors such as the overall shape of the virus and the symmetry of the capsid. Another level of classification is based on the presence or absence of a membranous envelope around the virion; still further subdivision is based on capsid size. One way to classify viruses is based on the type of host. Let's see how reproductive cycles and other properties vary among the major groups of viruses: those that infect bacteria, animals, and plants.13.2.4 Bacteriophages reproduce by a lytic cycle or a lysogenic cycle 241Viruses that infect bacteria are known as bacteriophages. Bacteriophages recognize their hosts by means of specific binding between proteins in the capsid and receptor proteins in the host's cell wall. The virions, which must penetrate the cell wall, are often equipped with tail assemblies that inject their nucleic acid through the cell wall into the host bacterium. After the phage has injected its nucleic acid into the host, one of two things happens, depending on the kind of phage. We saw one type of viral reproductive cycle when we studied the Hershey-Chase experiment. That was the lytic cycle, so named because the infected bacterium lyses (bursts), releasing progeny phages. In the lysogenic cycle, the infected bacterium does not lyse, but instead harbors the viral nucleic acid for many generations. Some viruses reproduce only by the lytic cycle; others undergo both types of reproductive cycles. Phages that reproduce only by the lytic cycle are called virulent viruses. Once the phage has injected its nucleic acid into the host cell, the phage nucleic acid takes over the host's synthetic machinery. It does so in two stages: The early stage transcribes the virus's early genes. This part of the viral genome contains the promoter sequence that attracts host RNA polymerase. The early genes often include proteins that shut down host transcription, stimulate viral genome replication, and stimulate late gene transcription. Nuclease enzymes digest the host chromosome, providing nucleotides for the assembly of viral genomes. The late stage transcribes the virus's late genes. These genes code for the proteins that package virions and lyse the host cell to release them. This sequence of transcriptional events is carefully controlled: Premature lysis of the host cell before virus particles are ready for release would stop the infection. The whole process-from binding and infection to lysis of the host-takes about half an hour. Rarely, two viruses infect a cell at the same time. This is an unusual event, as once an infection cycle is under way, there is usually not enough time for an additional infection. In addition, an early gene product prevents further infections in some cases. The presence of two viral genomes in the same host cell affords the opportunity for genetic recombination by crossing over, as in prophase of meiosis. This enables genetically different viruses to swap genes and create new strains.Phage infection does not always result in lysis of the host cell. Some phages seem to disappear from a bacterial culture, leaving the bacteria immune to further attack by the same strain of phage. In such cultures, however, a few free phages are always present. Bacteria harboring phages that are not lytic are called lysogenic, and the phages are called temperate viruses. Lysogenic bacteria contain a noninfective entity called a prophage: a molecule of phage DNA that has been integrated into the bacterial chromosome. As part of the bacterial genome, the prophage can remain quiet within the bacteria through many cell divisions. However, an occasional lysogenic bacterium can be induced to activate its prophage. This results in a lytic cycle, releasing a large number of free phages, which can then infect other uninfected bacteria and renew the reproductive cycle. This capacity to switch between the lysogenic and the lytic cycle is very useful to the phage, whose purpose is to reproduce as many offspring as possible. When its host cell is growing slowly and is low on energy, the phage becomes lysogenic. Then, when the host's health is restored to a level that provides maximal resources for phage reproduction, the prophage is released from its dormant state, and the lytic cycle proceeds. We will see how this switch works later in the chapter when we discuss control of gene expression.13.2.5 Animal viruses have diverse reproductive cycles 242Almost all vertebrates are susceptible to viral infections, but among invertebrates, such infections are common only in arthropods (the group that includes insects and crustaceans). One group of viruses, called arboviruses (short for "arthropod-borne viruses"), is transmitted to a mammalian host through an insect bite. Although carried within the arthropod host's cells, arboviruses apparently do not affect that host severely; they affect only the bitten and infected mammal. The arthropod acts as a vector-an intermediate carrier-transmitting the disease organism from one host to another. Animal viruses are very diverse. Some are just particles of proteins surrounding a nucleic acid core. Others have a membrane derived from the host cell's plasma membrane. Some animal viruses have DNA as their genetic material; others have RNA. In all cases, the small viral genome has limited coding capacity, making only a few proteins. Like that of bacteriophages, the life cycle of animal viruses can be divided into early and late stages. Animal viruses enter cells in one of three ways: A naked virion (without a membrane) is taken up by endocytosis, which traps it within a membranous vesicle inside the host cell. The membrane of the vesicle breaks down, releasing the virion into the cytoplasm, and the host cell digests the protein capsid, liberating the viral nucleic acid, which takes charge of the host cell. Viruses with membranes (called enveloped viruses) may also be taken up by endocytosis , and released from a vesicle. In these viruses, the viral membrane is studded with glycoproteins that bind to receptors on the host cell plasma membrane. More commonly, the host and viral membranes fuse, releasing the rest of the virion into the cell. Enveloped viruses usually escape from the host cell by budding through virus-modified areas of the host's plasma membrane. During this process, the completed virions acquire a membrane similar to that of the host cell. The life cycles of influenza virus and HIV, two important RNA viruses, illustrate the two different styles of infection by enveloped viruses. Influenza virus is endocytosed into a membrane vesicle. Fusion of the viral and vesicle membranes releases the virion into the cell. The virus carries its own enzyme to replicate its RNA genome into a complementary strand. The latter is then used as mRNA to make, by complementary base pairing, more copies of the viral genome. Retroviruses such as HIV have a more complex reproductive cycle. The virus enters a host cell by direct fusion of viral and cellular membranes. A major feature of the retroviral life cycle is the reverse transcription of retroviral RNA to produce a DNA provirus (cDNA), which is the form of the virus that gets integrated into the host DNA. The provirus may reside in the host chromosome permanently, occasionally being expressed to produce new virions. Almost every step in this complex cycle can, in principle be attacked by therapeutic drugs; this fact is used by researchers in their quest to conquer AIDS, the deadly condition caused by HIV infection in humans. This medical battle will be discussed further in Chapter 19.13.2.6 Many plant viruses spread with the help of vectors 243Viral diseases of flowering plants are very common. Plant viruses can be transmitted horizontally, from one plant to another, or vertically, from parent to offspring. To infect a plant cell, viruses must pass through a cell wall and through the host plasma membrane. Most plant viruses accomplish this penetration through their association with vectors. Infection of a plant usually results from attack by a virion-laden insect vector. When an insect vector penetrates a cell wall with its proboscis (snout), the virions can move from the insect into the plant. Plant viruses can be introduced artificially, without insect vectors, by bruising a leaf or other plant part, then exposing it to a suspension of virions. Horizontal viral infections may also occur in nature if a bruised infected plant contacts an injured uninfected one. Vertical transmission of viral infections may occur through vegetative or sexual reproduction. Once inside a plant cell, the virus reproduces and spreads to other cells in the plant. Within an organ such as a leaf, the virus spreads through the plasmodesmata, the cytoplasmic connections between cells. Because the viruses are too large to go through these channels, special proteins bind to them and help change their shape so that they can squeeze through the pores.13.2.7 Viroids are infectious agents consisting entirely of RNA 244Pure viral nucleic acids can produce viral infections under laboratory conditions, although inefficiently. Might there be infectious agents in nature that consist of nucleic acid without a protein capsid? In 1971, Theodore Diener of the U.S. Department of Agriculture reported the isolation of agents of this type, called viroids. Viroids are circular, single-stranded RNA molecules consisting of a few hundred nucleotides. They are one-thousandth the size of the smallest viruses. These RNA's are most abundant in the nuclei of infected cells. Viroids have been found only in plants, in which they produce a variety of diseases. Like plant viruses, viroids can be transmitted horizontally or vertically. There is no evidence that viroids are translated to synthesize proteins, and it is not known how they cause disease. Viroids are replicated by the enzymes of their plant hosts. Similarities in base sequences between viroids and certain nontranslated sequences (introns) of plant genes suggest that viroids evolved from introns. This conclusion is supported by the fact that viroids, although made of RNA, are catalytically active in the way that some introns are. 13.3 Prokaryotes: Reproduction, Mutation, and Recombination 245In contrast to viruses, bacteria and archaea are living cells. Prokaryotes carry out all the functions required for their own reproduction. They harvest and use energy, and they produce and use the molecular equipment that synthesizes their components and replicates their genes. Prokaryotes usually reproduce asexually, but nonetheless have several ways of recombining their genes. Whereas in eukaryotes, genetic recombination occurs between the genomes of two parents, in prokaryotes it results from the interaction of the genome of one cell with a much smaller sample of genes from another cell.13.3.1 The reproduction of prokaryotes gives rise to clones 245Most prokaryotes reproduce by the division of single cells into two identical offspring. In this way, a single cell gives rise to a clone-a population of genetically identical individuals. Prokaryotes reproduce very rapidly. A population of E coli, for example, can double every 20 minutes, as long as conditions remain favorable. Pure cultures of E coli or other bacteria can be grown on the surface of a solid medium that contain a sugar, minerals, a nitrogen source such as ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), and a solidifying agent such as agar. If the number of cells spread on the medium is small, each cell will give rise to a small, rapidly growing bacterial colony. If a large number of cells is poured onto the solid medium, their growth will produce one continuous colony-a bacterial "lawn." Bacteria can also be grown in a liquid nutrient medium. We'll see examples of all these techniques in this chapter.13.3.2 Some bacteria conjugate, recombining their genes 245The existence and heritability of mutations in bacteria attracted the attention of geneticists to these microbes. But if there were no form of exchange of genetic information between individuals, bacteria would not be useful for genetic analysis. Luckily, in 1946, Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum demonstrated that such exchanges do occur, although they are rare events. Lederberg and Tatum grew two nutrient-requiring, or auxotrophic, strains of E coli. Like the Neurospora, these strains will not grow on a minimal medium, but require supplementation with a nutrient that they cannot synthesize for themselves because of an enzyme defect. E coli strain 1 requires the amino acid methionine and the vitamin biotin for growth, and its genotype is symbolized as met-bio-. Strain 2 requires neither of these substances, but cannot grow without the amino acids threonine and leucine. Considering all four factors, we say that strain 1 is met-bio-thr+leu+ and strain 2 is met+bio+thr-leu-. Lederberg and Tatum mixed these two mutant strains and cultured them together for several hours on a medium supplemented with methionine, biotin, threonine, and leucine, so that both strains could grow. The bacteria were then removed from the medium by centrifugation, washed, and transferred to minimal medium, which lacked all four supplements. Neither strain could grow on this medium because of their nutritional requirements. However, a few colonies did appear on the plates. Because they grew in the minimal medium, these colonies must have consisted of bacteria that were met+bio+thr+leu+; that is, they must have been prototrophic. These colonies appeared at a rate of approximately 1 for every 10 million cells originally put on the plates. Where did these prototrophic colonies  come from? Lederberg and Tatum were able to rule out mutation, and other investigators ruled out transformation. A third possibility is that the two strains of bacteria had exchanged genetic material, allowing it to mix and recombine to produce cells containing met+ and bio+ alleles from strain 2 and thr+ and leu+ alleles from strain 1. Later experiments showed that such an exchange, called conjugation, had indeed occurred. One bacterial cell-the recipient-had received DNA from the other cell-the donor-that included the two wild-type alleles that were missing in the recipient. Recombination then created a genotype with four wild-type alleles. The physical contact required for conjugation can be observed under the electron microscope. It is initiated by a thin projection called a pilus. Then the actual transfer of DNA from one cell to another occurs by a thin conjugation tube. Since bacterial DNA is circular, it must be made linear (broken) so that it can pass through the tube. Contact between the cells is brief-certainly not long enough for all of the donor genome to enter the recipient cell. Therefore, the recipient cell receives only a portion of the donor DNA. Once the donor fragment is inside the recipient cell, recombination can occur. In much the same way that chromosomes pair up, gene for gene, in prophase of meiosis, the donor DNA can line up beside its homologous gene in the recipient. Enzymes that can cut and rejoin DNA molecules are active in bacteria, and so gene(s) of the donor can end up integrated into the genome of the recipient, thus changing its genetic constitution.13.3.3 In transformation, cells pick up genes from their environment 247Frederick Griffith obtained the first evidence for the transfer of prokaryotic genes more than 75 years ago when he discovered  the transforming principle. We now know the reason for his results: DNA had leaked from dead cells of virulent pneumococci and was taken up as free DNA by living nonvirulent pneumococci, which became virulent as a result. This phenomenon, called transformation, occurs in nature in some species of bacteria when cells die and their DNA leaks out. Once transforming DNA is inside a host cell, an event very similar to recombination occurs, and new genes can be incorporated into the host chromosome.13.3.4 In transduction, viruses carry genes from one cell to another 247When bacteriophages undergo a lytic cycle, they package their genomic DNA in capsids. These capsids generally form before the DNA is inserted into them. Sometimes, bacterial DNA fragments get inserted into the empty phage capsids instead of the phage DNA! Recall that the binding of a phage to its host cell and the insertion of phage DNA are carried out by the capsid. So, when a phage capsid carries a piece of bacterial DNA, the latter is injected into the "infected" bacterium. This mechanism of DNA transfer is called transduction. Needless to say, it does not result in a productive viral infection. Instead, the incoming DNA fragment can recombine with the host chromosome.13.3.5 Plasmids are extra chromosomes in bacteria 248In addition to their main chromosome, many bacteria harbor additional smaller, circular chromosomes. These chromosomes, called plasmids, contain at most a few dozen genes, and, importantly, an origin sequence where DNA replication starts, which defines them as chromosomes. Usually, plasmids replicate at the same time as the host chromosome during the bacterial cell cycle, but this is not necessarily the case. Plasmids are not viruses. They do not take over the cell's molecular machinery or make a protein coat to help them move from cell to cell. Instead, they can move between cells during conjugation, thereby adding some new genes to the recipient bacterium 1. Since plasmids exist independently of the main chromosome (the term episomes is sometimes used), they do not need to recombine with the main chromosome to add their genes to the cell's genome. There are several types of plasmids, classified according to the kinds of genes they carry. Some plasmids, called metabolic factors, have genes that allow their recipients to carry out unusual metabolic functions. For example, there are many unusual hydrocarbons in oil spills. Some bacteria can actually thrive on these molecules, using them as a carbon source. The genes for the enzymes involved in these degradative pathways are carried on plasmids. The "F" in F factors stands for fertility. Their approximately 25 genes include the ones that make both the pilus for attachment and the conjugation tube for DNA transfer to a recipient bacterium. A cell harboring the F factor is called F+. It can transfer a copy of the F factor to an F- cell, making the recipient F+. Sometimes, the F factor can integrate into the main chromosome (at which point it is no longer a plasmid), and when it does, it can bring along some bacterial genes when it moves through the conjugation tube from one cell to another. r factors are resistance factors. R factors may carry genes coding for proteins that destroy or modify antibiotics. Other R factors provide resistance to heavy metals that bacteria encounter in their environment. R factors first came to the attention of biologists in 1957 during an epidemic in Japan, when it was discovered that some strains of the Shigella bacterium, which causes dysentery, were resistant to several antibiotics. Researchers found that resistance to the entire spectrum of antibiotics could be transferred by conjugation even when no genes on the main chromosome were transferred.
Eventually it was shown that the genes for antibiotic resistance are carried on plasmids Each R factor carries one or more genes conferring resistance to particular antibiotics, as well as genes that code for proteins involved in the transfer of DNA to a recipient bacterium. As far as biologists can determine, R factors appeared long before antibiotics were discovered, but they seem to have become more abundant in modern times, possibly because the heavy use of antibiotics in the hospital environment selects for bacterial strains bearing them. R factors also pose a threat to people in the general clinical setting if antibiotics are used inappropriately. You probably have gone to see a physician because of a sore throat, which can have either a viral or a bacterial cause. The best way to know is for the doctor to take a small sample from your inflamed throat, culture it, and identify any bacteria that are present. But perhaps you cannot wait another day for the results. Impatient, you ask the doctor to give you something to  make you feel better. She prescribes an antibiotic, which you take. The sore throat gradually gets better, and you think that the antibiotic did the job. But suppose the infection was viral? In that case, the antibiotic did nothing to combat the disease, which just ran its normal course. However, it may have done something harmful: By killing many normal bacteria in your body, it may have exerted selection for bacteria harboring R factors. These bacteria may reproduce in the presence of the antibiotic, and may soon become quite numerous. The next time you got a bacterial infection, there would be a ready supply of R factors to be transferred to the invading bacteria, and antibiotics might be ineffective.13.3.6 Transposable elements move genes among plasmids and chromosomes 249As we have seen, plasmids, viruses, and even phage capsids (in the case of transduction) can transport genes from one bacterial cell to another. There is another type of "gene transport" that occurs within the individual cell. It relies on segments of chromosomal or plasmid DNA that can be inserted either at new locations on the same chromosome, or into another chromosome. These DNA sequences are called transposable elements. Their insertion often produces phenotypic effects by disrupting the genes into which they are inserted. The first transposable elements to be discovered in prokaryotes were large pieces of DNA, typically 1,000 to 2,000 base pairs long, found in many places in the E coli main chromosome. In one mechanism of transposition, the sequence of a transposable element replicates independently of the rest of the chromosome. The copy then inserts itself at other, seemingly random places in the chromosome. The genes encoding the enzymes necessary for this insertion are found within the transposable element itself. Some other transposable elements are cut from their original sites and inserted elsewhere without replication. Many transposable elements discovered later were longer (about 5,000 base pairs) and carried one or more additional genes with them. These longer elements with additional genes are called transposons. What do transposons and other transposable elements have to do with the genetics of prokaryotes-or with hospitals? Transposable elements have contributed to the evolution of plasmids. R plasmids probably originally gained their genes for antibiotic resistance through the activity of transposable elements. One piece of evidence for this conclusion is that each resistance gene in an R plasmid is part of a transposon. 13.4 Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes 249Except for mutations, all cells of a bacterial species have the same DNA, and thus the capacity to make the same proteins. Yet the protein content of a bacterium can change rapidly when conditions warrant. For example, there are two ways for a bacterium to get the amino groups that it needs to make amino acids and proteins. One way involves taking N2 from the air and "fixing" it into ammonia (NH, then using the ammonia as a source of amino groups. This reaction requires several enzymes and a lot of energy. The other way to obtain amino groups is to take them from glutamine and use them directly. This reaction requires only one enzyme and is not as endergonic. If there is a lot of glutamine around, the cell takes the easy way out, using the glutamine rather than the N2 pathway. In fact, the enzymes that are involved in the N2 pathway are not even made when glutamine is present. There are several ways in which a prokaryotic cell could shut off the synthesis or activity of an unneeded protein: The cell could block the transcription of mRNA for that protein. The cell could hydrolyze the mRNA after it was made. The cell could prevent translation of the mRNA at the ribosome. The cell could hydrolyze the protein after it was made. These methods would all have to be selective, responding to some biochemical signal. In the case of our two pathways for obtaining amino groups, the signal might be an increased concentration of glutamine. Clearly, the earlier the cell intervenes in the process, the less energy it has to expend. Selective inhibition of transcription is far more efficient than transcribing the gene, translating the message, and then degrading the protein. While there are examples of all four methods of control of protein levels innature, prokaryotes generally use the most efficient one, transcriptional control.13.4.1 Regulation of transcription conserves energy 250As a normal inhabitant of the human intestine, E coli has to adjust to sudden changes in its chemical environment. Its host may present it with one foodstuff one hour and another the next. This variability presents the bacterium with a metabolic challenge. Glucose is its preferred energy source, and is the easiest sugar to metabolized, but not all of its host's foods contain an abundant supply of glucose. For example, the bacteria may suddenly be deluged with milk, the main carbohydrate of which is the sugar lactose. Lactose is a ?-galactoside-a disaccharide containing galactose ?-linked to glucose. Before lactose can be of any use to the bacteria, it must first be taken into the cells by a membrane transport carrier called ?-galactoside permease. Then it must be hydrolyzed to glucose and galactose by the enzyme ?-galactosidase. A third protein, the enzyme thiogalactoside transacetylase, is also required for lactose metabolism. When E coli is grown on a medium that does not contain lactose or other ?-galactosides, the levels of all three of these enzymes within the bacterial cell are extremely low-the cell does not waste energy and materials making the unneeded proteins. If, however, the environment changes such that lactose is the predominant sugar and very little glucose is present, the synthesis of all three of these enzymes begins promptly, and they increase rapidly in abundance. For example, there are only two molecules of ?-galactosidase present in an E coli cell when glucose is present in the medium. But when it is absent, lactose can induce the synthesis of 3,000 molecules of ?-galactosidase per cell! If lactose is removed from E coli's environment, synthesis of the three enzymes that process it stops almost immediately. The enzyme molecules that have already formed do not disappear; they are merely diluted during subsequent growth and reproduction until their concentration falls to the original low level within each bacterium. Compounds that stimulate the synthesis of an enzyme (such as lactose in our example) are called inducers 1. The enzymes that are produced are called inducible enzymes, whereas enzymes that are made all the time at a constant rate are called constitutive enzymes. We have now seen two basic ways to regulate the rates of metabolic pathways. In Chapter 6, we described allosteric regulation of enzyme activity (the rate of enzyme-catalyzed reactions); this mechanism allows rapid fine-tuning of metabolism. Regulation of protein synthesis-that is, regulation of the concentration of enzymes-is slower, but produces a greater savings of energy.13.4.2 A single promoter controls the transcription of adjacent genes 250The genes that serve as blueprints for the synthesis of the three proteins that process lactose are called structural genes, indicating that they specify the primary structure (the amino acid sequence) of a protein molecule. In other words, structural genes are those that can be transcribed into mRNA. Three such genes are involved in the metabolism of lactose, and they lie adjacent to each other on the E coli chromosome. This is no coincidence. Their DNA is transcribed into a single, continuous molecule of mRNA. Because this particular messenger governs the synthesis of all three lactose-metabolizing enzymes, either all or none of the enzymes are made, depending on whether their common message-their mRNA-is present in the cell. The three genes share a single promoter. Recall from Chapter 12 that a promoter is a site on DNA where RNA polymerase binds to initiate transcription. The promoter for these three structural genes is very efficient, so that the maximum rate of mRNA synthesis can be high, but there must also be a way to shut down mRNA synthesis when the enzymes are not needed.13.4.3 Operons are units of transcription in prokaryotes 251Prokaryotes shut down transcription by placing an obstacle between the promoter and its structural genes. A short stretch of DNA called the operator lies in this position. It can bind very tightly to a special type of protein molecule, called a repressor, to create such an obstacle. When the repressor protein is bound to the operator region of DNA, it blocks the transcription of mRNA 1. When the repressor is not attached to the operator, mRNA synthesis proceeds rapidly. The whole unit, consisting of the closely linked structural genes and the stretches of DNA that control their transcription, is called an operon 1. An operon always consists of a promoter, an operator, and one or more structural genes. The promoter and operator are binding sites on DNA and are not transcribed. E coli has numerous ways to control the transcription of operons, and we will focus on three of them. Two ways depend on interactions of the repressor protein with the operator, and the third depends on interactions of other proteins with the promoter. Let's consider each of these three control systems in turn. The operon that controls and contains the structural genes for the three lactose-metabolizing enzymes is called the lac operon 1. As we have just learned, RNA polymerase can bind to the promoter, and a repressor can bind to the operator. How is the operon controlled? The key lies in the repressor and its binding to the operator. The repressor protein has two binding sites: one for the operator and the other for inducers. The inducers of the lac operon, as we know, are molecules of lactose and certain other ?-galactosides. Binding of an inducer changes the shape of the repressor (by allosteric modification; see Chapter. This change in shape prevents the repressor from binding to the operator 1. As a result, RNA polymerase can bind to the promoter and start transcribing the structural genes of the lac operon. The mRNA transcribed from these genes is translated on ribosomes, synthesizing the three proteins required for metabolizing lactose. What happens if the concentration of lactose drops? As the lactose concentration decreases, the inducer (lactose) molecules separate from the repressor. Free of lactose molecules, the repressor returns to its original shape and binds to the operator, and transcription of the lac operon stops. Translation stops soon thereafter, because the mRNA that is already present breaks down quickly. Thus, it is the presence or absence of lactose-the inducer-that regulates the binding of the repressor to the operator, and therefore the synthesis of the proteins needed to metabolize it.
Repressor proteins are coded by regulatory genes. The regulatory gene that codes for the repressor of the lac operon is called the i (inducibility) gene. The i gene happens to lie close to the operon that it controls, but some other regulatory genes are distant from their operons. Like all other genes, the i gene itself has a promoter, which can be designated pi. Because this promoter does not bind RNA polymerase very effectively, only enough mRNA to synthesize about ten molecules of repressor protein per cell per generation is produced. This quantity of the repressor is enough to regulate the operon effectively-to produce more would be a waste of energy. There is no operator between pi and the i gene. Therefore, the repressor of the lac operon is constitutive; that is, it is made at a constant rate that is not subject to environmental control. Let's review the important features of inducible systems such as the lac operon: In the absence of inducer, the lac operon is turned off. Control is exerted by a regulatory protein-the repressor-that turns the operon off. Some genes, such as i, produce proteins whose sole function is to regulate the expression of other genes. Certain other DNA sequences (operators and promoters) do not code for proteins but are binding sites for regulatory proteins. Adding inducer turns the operon on.
13.4.3 Operator-repressor control that represses transcription: The trp operon 252 @We have seen that E coli benefits from having an inducible system for lactose metabolism. Only when lactose is present does the system switch on. Equally valuable to a bacterium is the ability to switch off the synthesis of certain enzymes in response to the excessive accumulation of their end products. For example, if the amino acid tryptophan, an essential constituent of proteins, is present in ample concentration, it is advantageous to stop making the enzymes for tryptophan synthesis. When the synthesis of an enzyme can be turned off in response to such a biochemical cue, it is said to be repressible. The French biochemist Jacques Monod, who had been part of the team that deciphered the lac operon, realized that repressible systems, such as the trp operon for tryptophan synthesis, could work by mechanisms similar to those of inducible systems. In repressible systems, the repressor protein cannot shut off its operon unless it first binds to a corepressor, which may be either the metabolite itself (tryptophan in this case) or an analog of it 1. If the metabolite is absent, the operon is transcribed at a maximum rate. If the metabolite is present, the operon is turned off. The difference between inducible and repressible systems is small, but significant. In inducible systems, a substance in the environment (the inducer) interacts with the regulatory gene product (the repressor), rendering it incapable of binding to the operator and thus incapable of blocking transcription. In repressible systems, a substance in the cell (the corepressor) interacts with the regulatory gene product to make it capable of binding to the operator and blocking transcription. Although the effects of the substances are exactly opposite, the systems as a whole are strikingly similar. In both the inducible lactose system and the repressible tryptophan system, the regulatory molecule functions by binding the operator. Next we'll consider an example of control by binding the promoter.13.4.4 Protein synthesis can be controlled by increasing promoter efficiency 253The mechanisms of transcriptional regulation that we have discussed thus far involve repressor-operator interactions that turn the operon on or off. Another way to regulate transcription is to make the promoter work more efficiently. Suppose that a bacterial cell lacks a supply of glucose, its preferred energy source, but instead has access to another sugar (e.g., lactose, maltose) that can be broken down to enter an energy pathway. In operons such as the lac operon that have genes for enzymes that catabolize such alternative energy sources, the promoters bind RNA polymerase in a series of steps 1. First, a protein called CRP (short for cAMP receptor protein) binds the low-molecular-weight compound adenosine 3?,5?-cyclic monophosphate, better known as cyclic AMP, or cAMP. Next, the CRP-cAMP complex binds to DNA just upstream of the promoter. This binding results in more efficient binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter, and an elevated level of transcription of the structural genes. When glucose becomes abundant in the medium, the bacteria do not need to break down alternative food molecules, so the cell diminishes or ceases synthesizing the enzymes that catabolize these alternative sources. Glucose decreases the synthesis of these enzymes-a phenomenon called catabolite repression-by lowering the cellular concentration of cAMP. As you will see in later chapters of this book, cAMP is a widely used signaling molecule in eukaryotes, as well as prokaryotes. The use of this nucleotide in such widely diverse situations as a bacterium sensing glucose levels and humans sensing hunger demonstrates the prevalence of common themes in biochemistry and natural selection. The lac and trp systems-the two operator-repressor systems-are examples of negative control of transcription because the regulatory molecule (the repressor) in each case prevents transcription. The promoter system is an example of positive control of transcription because the regulatory molecule (the CRP-cAMP complex) enhances transcription. 13.5 Control of Transcription in Viruses 254The mechanisms used by prokaryotes for the regulation of gene expression are also used by viruses. Even a "simple" biological agent such as a virus is faced with complicated molecular decisions when its genome enters a cell. For example, the viral genome must direct the shutdown of host transcription and translation, then redirect the host protein synthesis machinery to virus production. Genes must be activated in the right order; it makes little sense, for example, for the viral genome to transcribe and translate proteins that lyse the host cell membrane before the virus particles are assembled, ready for release. In temperate viruses, which insert their genome (or a DNA copy) into the host chromosome, another issue arises: when should the provirus leave the host chromosome and undertake a lytic cycle? Bacteriophage lambda is a temperate phage, which can undergo either a lytic or a lysogenic cycle. When there is a rich medium and its host bacteria are growing, the phage takes advantage of its favorable environment (lots of resources for the phage  in the host cell cytoplasm) and undergoes a lytic cycle. When the host bacteria are not as healthy, the phage senses this, and "lays low" as a lysogenic prophage. When things improve, the prophage leaves the host chromosome and becomes lytic. The phage makes this decision by means of a "genetic switch": Two regulatory proteins compete for two operator/promoter sites on phage DNA. The two operators control the transcription of genes involved in the lytic and the lysogenic cycles, respectively, and the two regulatory proteins have opposite effects on the two operators. So phage infection is a "race" between these two  regulatory proteins. If cI "wins," which occurs when Cro synthesis is low in an unhealthy E coli host cell, the phage enters a lysogenic cycle. If the host cell is healthy, a lot of Cro is made, lysogeny is blocked, and lysis ensues. These regulatory proteins, made very early in phage infection, both have binding domains for recognition of specific phage DNA sequences. The life cycle of phage lambda, which has been greatly simplified here, is a paradigm for viral infections throughout the biological world. The lessons learned from transcriptional controls in this system have been applied again and again to other viruses, including HIV. The control of gene activity in eukaryotic cells is somewhat different, as we will see in the next chapter, but nevertheless usually involves protein-DNA interactions. 13.6 Prokaryotic Genomes 255When DNA sequencing first became possible in the late 1970s, the first biological agents to be sequenced were the simplest viruses. Soon, over 150 viral genomes, including those of important animal and plant pathogens, were sequenced. Information on how they infected and reproduced came quickly as a result. But manual sequencing was not up to the task of elucidating the genomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the smallest of which are 100 times larger than those of a bacteriophage. In the past 6 years, however, the automation of sequencing has rapidly added many prokaryotic sequences to the biologists' store of knowledge. In 1995, a team led by Craig Venter and Hamilton Smith determined the first sequence of a free-living organism, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Many more sequences have followed, and they have revealed not only how these organisms apportion their genes to perform different cellular roles, but how their specialized functions are carried out. A beginning has even been made on the provocative question of what the minimal requirements for a living cell might be. Three types of information can be obtained from a genomic sequence: Open reading frames, which are the coding regions of genes. For protein-coding genes, these regions can be recognized by the start and stop codons for translation. Amino acid sequences. For proteins, these can be deduced from the DNA sequence by looking up the genetic code. Gene control sequences, such as promoters and terminators for transcription.13.6.1 Functional genomics relates gene sequences to functions 255The only host for the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae is humans. It lives in the upper respiratory tract and can cause ear infections or, more seriously, meningitis in children. Its 1,830,137 base pairs are in a single circular chromosome 2. In addition to its origin of DNA replication and genes coding for rRNA's and tRNA's, this bacterial chromosome has 1,743 regions containing amino acid codons along with the transcriptional (promoter) and translational (start and stop codons) information needed for protein synthesis. When this sequence was first announced, only 1,007 (58 percent) of its genes had amino acid sequences that corresponded to proteins with known functions-in other words, were genes that researchers, based on their knowledge of the functions of bacteria, expected to find. Roles for most of the unknown proteins have been identified since then, a process known as annotation. Functional genomics, the assignment of roles to genes and the description of how they work in the organism, has become the major occupation of many biologists. Of the genes and proteins with known roles, most confirm a century of biochemical description of bacterial enzymatic pathways. For example, there are genes for the entire pathways of glycolysis, fermentation, and electron transport. Some of the gene sequences for unknown proteins may code for membrane proteins, possibly those involved in active transport. Another important finding is that highly infective strains of this bacterium have genes coding for surface proteins that attach them to the human respiratory tract, while noninfective strains lack those genes. Soon after the sequence of H. influenzae was announced, smaller (Mycoplasma genitalium, 580,070 base pairs) and larger (E coli, 4,639,221 base pairs) prokaryotic sequences were completed. Thus began a new era in biology, the era of comparative genomics, in which genome sequences are compared to see what genes one organism has or is missing, in order to relate the results to physiology. M genitalium, for example, lacks the enzymes needed to synthesize amino acids, which the other two organisms possess.This finding reveals that M genitalium is a parasite, which must obtain all its amino acids from its environment, the human urogenital tract. E coli has 55 genes coding for transcriptional activation and 58 repressors; M genitalium has only 3 activators. Comparisons such as these have led to the formulation of specific questions about how an organism lives the way it does.13.6.2 The sequencing  of prokaryotic genomes has medical applications 256Sequencing has important ramifications for the study of prokaryotes that cause human diseases. Indeed, most of the early efforts in sequencing have focused on human pathogens. Chlamydia trachomatis causes the most common sexually transmitted disease in the United States. Because it is an intracellular parasite, it has been very hard to study. Among its 900 genes are ones for ATP synthesis-something scientists used to think this bacterium could not do. Rickettsai prowazekii causes typhus; it infects people bitten by lice vectors. Of its 634 genes, 6 code for proteins that are essential for its virulence. These genes are being used to develop vaccines. Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis. It has a large (for a prokaryote) genome, coding for 4,000 proteins. Over 250 of these are used to metabolize lipids, so this may be the main way that the bacteria gets its energy. Some genes coding for previously unidentified cell surface proteins are targets for potential vaccines. The sequence has enough similarities to those of mitochondria to lead to the proposal that this bacterium's ancestor was the one that colonized a cell to ultimately produce that organelle. Sequencing has also provided the necessary information for the design of primers and hybridization probes used to detect these and other pathogens.13.6.3 What genes are required for cellular life? 256One striking conclusion arising from comparing the genomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes is that there are some truly universal genes, present in all organisms. There are also some universal gene segments-coding for an ATP binding site, for example-that are present in many genes in many organisms. These findings suggest that there is some ancient, minimal set of DNA sequences that all cells must have. One way to identify these sequences is to look for them (or, more realistically, to have a computer look for them). Another way to define a minimal genome is to take the simplest genome and deliberately mutate one gene at a time and see what happens. M genitalium, with only 470 genes, has the smallest known genome of any organism. Some of its genes are dispensable under some circumstances: There are genes for using both glucose and fructose, and in the laboratory, the organism could survive on only one of those sugars, making the genes for the other unnecessary. But what about other genes? Experiments using transposons as mutagens have been performed to address this question. The transposons insert themselves into a gene at random, mutating and inactivating it. The resulting mutated cell is sequenced to determine which gene was mutated, and then examined for growth and survival. The astonishing result of these studies is that M genitalium can survive in the laboratory without the services of 133 of its genes, leaving a minimum of 337 genes! Putting it another way, these 337 genes could theoretically be spliced together (or even synthesized in the laboratory) to make totally artificial life. It is not surprising that the scientists involved in this research have convened a panel of theologians, philosophers and lawyers to advise them.14 The Eukaryotic Genome and Its ExpressionWhen Tom was diagnosed with acute leukemia-cancer of the blood cells-his initial treatment included chemotherapy. Combinations of powerful antimitotic drugs were administered to kill the rapidly dividing cancer cells that were spreading throughout his body. But the dosages his physicians prescribed were not up to the task, and the cells continued to spread. Higher dosages of these chemotherapeutic drugs would be lethal; they would kill not only the cancer cells, but the healthy and essential cells in the bone marrow that divide by the hundreds of millions to form blood cells. Without these cells, Tom's bone marrow would no longer produce red blood cells with their vital oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobin, nor would he be able to produce white blood cells, which make the proteins that combat infectious diseases as well as some tumors. Tom's doctors tried a new approach. They extracted some of his bone marrow and removed the cancer cells from it, then stored the marrow in a refrigerator. Then they gave Tom extremely high doses of the chemotherapeutic drugs, which killed the cancer cells. Finally, the stored bone marrow was replaced in Tom's body. The healthy bone marrow cells began to divide, and after a few weeks they were forming populations of normal red and white blood cells. Tom's leukemia had disappeared. The success of Tom's bone marrow transplant depended on many things, but the principle behind it is based on the specificity of gene expression during cell differentiation. What are the genetic mechanisms that ensure that healthy red blood cells will contain hemoglobin, and that white blood cells are able to create the vital antibody proteins of the immune system? What features of the DNA sequences of eukaryotic genes determine these mechanisms, and how do they differ from the genes that code for proteins in prokaryotes? In this chapter, you will see that, although both prokaryotes and eukaryotes use DNA as genetic material, eukaryotic DNA differs from prokaryotic DNA in both its content and its organization. In addition to the genes for metabolism that prokaryotes have, eukaryotes have additional genes that mark them as complex cells: genes for addressing, or targeting, proteins to organelles, and genes for cell-cell interaction and cell differentiation. Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have repetitive sequences of DNA, many of which do not code for proteins. In addition, the transcription and later tailoring of mRNA is more complicated in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes.Elegant molecular machinery allows the precise regulation of gene expression needed for all the cells of these complex organisms to develop and function. 14.1 The Eukaryotic Genome 259As biologists unraveled the intricacies of gene structure and expression in prokaryotes, they tried to generalize their findings by saying, "What's true for E coli is also true for elephants." Although much of prokaryotic biochemistry does apply to eukaryotes, the old saying has its limitations. Table 14.1 lists some of the differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes.14.1.1 The eukaryotic genome is larger and more complex than the prokaryotic genome 259The fact that the genomeof eukaryotes (in terms of haploid DNA content) is larger than that of prokaryotes might be expected, given that in multicellular organisms there are many cell types, many jobs to do, and many proteins-all coded for by DNA-to do those jobs. A typical virus contains only enough DNA to code for a few proteins-about 10,000 base pairs (bp). The most thoroughly studied prokaryote, E coli, has sufficient DNA (about 4.7 million bp) to make several thousand different proteins and regulate their synthesis. Humans have considerably more genes and regulators: nearly 6 billion bp (2 meters of DNA) are crammed into each human cell. However, the idea of a more complex organism needing more DNA seems to break down with some plants. For example, the lily (which produces beautiful flowers each spring, but produces fewer proteins than a human does) has 18 times more DNA than humans have. As we will see, the organization of the nuclear eukaryotic genome is fundamentally about regulation. The great complexity of eukaryotes requires a great deal of regulation, and this fact is evident in the many processes and points of control associated with the expression of the eukaryotic genome. Unlike prokaryotic DNA, most eukaryotic DNA does not code for proteins. Instead, interspersed throughout the eukaryotic genome are various kinds of repeated DNA sequences that are not transcribed. Even the coding regions of genes contain sequences that do not end up in mature mRNA. Some of this noncoding DNA maintains structural integrity at the ends of chromosomes, and some regulates gene expression. But the presence of much of this noncoding DNA remains an enigma. In contrast to the single main chromosome of most prokaryotes, the eukaryotic genome is partitioned into several separate chromosomes. In humans, each chromosome contains a double helix of DNA with 20 million to 100 million bp. This separation of genomic encyclopedia into multiple volumes requires that each chromosome have, at a minimum, three defining DNA sequences: recognition sequences for the DNA replication machinery, a centromere region that holds the replicated sequences together before mitosis, and a telomeric sequence at each end of the chromosome. We have described the roles of the first two types of sequences in previous chapters, and will discuss telomeres later in this chapter.

In eukaryotes, the nuclear envelope separates DNA and its transcription (inside the nucleus) from the cytoplasmic sites where mRNA is translated into protein. This separation allows for many points of control in the synthesis, processing, and transport of mRNA to the cytoplasm. Most eukaryotic DNA is not even fully exposed to the nuclear environment. Instead, it is extensively packaged by proteins into nucleosomes, chromatin fibers, and ultimately chromosomes. This extensive compaction is a means of restricting access of the RNA synthesis machinery to the DNA, as well as a way of segregating replicated DNA's during mitosis and meiosis. Like the genes of prokaryotes that code for proteins, eukaryotic genes are flanked by noncoding sequences that regulate their transcription. These include the promoter region, where RNA polymerase binds to begin transcription. Of equal importance in eukaryotes, but rare in prokaryotes, is a second set of regulatory DNA sequences, the enhancers and silencers. These sequences are often located quite distant from the promoter, and they act by binding proteins that then stimulate or inhibit transcription. The noncoding DNA sequences found within protein-coding genes present a special problem: How do cells ensure that transcripts of these noncoding regions do not end up in the mRNA that exits the nucleus? The answer lies in an elaborate cutting and splicing mechanism within the nucleus that modifies the initial transcript, called pre-mRNA, by cutting out the noncoding regions after transcription. Thus, in contrast to the "what is transcribed is what is translated" scheme of most prokaryotic genes, the mature mRNA that is translated at the eukaryotic ribosome is a modified and much smaller molecule than the one initially made in the nucleus. As we described in Chapter 13, advances in the automation of DNA sequencing have made it possible to obtain the entire sequences of many prokaryotic genomes. A next step in size and complexity is the sequencing of simple eukaryotes. This has been achieved for a single-celled organism, yeast, as well as for the multicellular roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. Further breakthroughs in the speed and sophistication of the equipment used to sequence DNA accelerated the work on complex eukaryotic genomes, and complete base sequencing of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster was completed in late 1999. And summer of the year 2000 saw the announcement, replete with media hyperbole, of the complete base sequencing of the human genome.14.1.2 The yeast genome adds some eukaryotic functions onto a prokaryotic model 261In comparison with E coli, whose genome has about 4,500,000 bp on a single chromosome, the genome of budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has 16 chromosomes and more than 12,068,000 bp. More than 600 scientists around the world collaborated in mapping and sequencing the yeast genome. When they began, they knew of about 1,000 yeast genes coding for RNA or protein. The final sequence revealed 6,200 genes; sequence analyses have assigned probable roles to about 70 percent of them. The functions of the other 30 percent are being investigated by gene inactivation studies similar to those performed on prokaryotes. It is now possible to estimate what proportions of the yeast genome code for specific metabolic roles. Apparently, 11 percent of yeast proteins are for general metabolism, 3 percent for energy production and storage, 3 percent for DNA replication and repair, 12 percent for protein synthesis, and 6 percent for protein targeting and secretion. Many of the others are involved in cell structure, cell division, and the regulation of gene expression. The most striking difference between the yeast genome and that of E coli is in the genes for protein targeting. Both of these single-celled organisms appear to use about the same number of genes to perform the basic functions of cell survival. It is the compartmentalization of the eukaryotic cell into organelles that requires it to have many more genes. This finding is direct and quantitative confirmation of something we have known for a century: that the eukaryotic cell is structurally more complex than the prokaryotic cell.14.1.3 The nematode genome adds developmental complexity 262The presence of more than a single cell adds a new level of complexity to the genome. Caenorhabditis elegans is a 1-mm long nematode (roundworm) that normally lives in the soil. But it also lives in the laboratory, where it is a favorite organism of developmental biologists. It has a transparent body, through which scientists can watch over 3 days as its fertilized egg divide and form an adult worm of 1,000 cells. In spite of its small number of cells, the adult worm has a nervous system, digests food, reproduces sexually, and ages. So it is not surprising that an intense effort was made to sequence the genome of this organism. Just as with yeast and E coli, the computer-based science of comparative genomics has given us much information on the C. elegans genome. It is eight times larger than that of yeast (97 million base pairs) and has four times more protein-coding genes (19,09. Once again, sequencing revealed far more than expected: when the sequencing effort began, researchers estimated that the worm would have about 6,000 proteins. About 3,000 genes in the worm have direct homologs in yeast; these genes code for basic eukaryotic cell functions. What do the rest of the genes-the bulk of the worm genome-do? In addition to surviving, growing, and dividing, as single-celled organisms do, multicellular organisms must have genes for holding cells together to form tissues, for cell differentiation to divide up tasks in the organism, and for intercellular communication to coordinate its activities. Many of the genes so far identified in C. elegans that are not present in yeast perform these roles, which will be described in the remainder of this chapter and the next one.14.1.4 The fruit fly genome has surprisingly few genes 262The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is a much larger organism than C. elegans, both in size (the fly has 10 times more cells) and complexity. Not surprisingly, the fly genome is also larger, about 180,000,000 base pairs. New technologies made it possible to sequence the entire Drosophila genome in about a year. Even before the complete sequence was announced, decades of genetic studies had already identified some 2,500 different genes in the fly. These genes were all found in the complete DNA sequence, along with many other genes whose function is as yet unidentified. Efforts are now under way to determine what these genes do in the life of the fly. (This process of discovering the protein product and function of a known gene sequence is called annotation.) But the big surprise of the Drosophila genome sequence was the total number of protein-coding regions. Instead of being higher than the roundworm's (18,000 genes), the fly has only 13,600 genes. One reason for this is that the roundworm has some large gene families, which, as we will see later in this chapter, are groups of genes related in their sequence and function. For example, C. elegans has 1,100 genes involved in either nerve cell signaling or development; a fly has only 160 genes for these two functions. Another major expansion in the worm is in its genes coding for proteins that sense chemicals in its environment. Many genes that are present in the worm genome have homologs with similar sequences in fly DNA, accounting for a third of the fly genes. And about half of the fly genes have mammalian homologs. An important medical contribution of comparative genomics has resulted from finding genes that are implicated in human diseases in other organisms. Often the roles of such genes can be elucidated in the simpler organism, providing a clue to how the gene might function in human disease. The fly genome contains 177 genes whose sequences are known to be directly involved in human diseases, including cancer and neurological conditions.14.1.5 Gene sequences for other organisms are rapidly becoming known 263A "rough" human genome sequence is already available, with a more detailed one just a few years away. The human genome sequence and its myriad implications will be discussed in Chapter 18. Meanwhile, sequencing is proceeding rapidly for another model organism: the weedy plant Arabidopsis thaliana (130 million base pairs). These eukaryotic sequences will pose great challenges and opportunities for biologists in the next decades. "The sequence is not the end of the day," says Sydney Brenner, a leader of this effort. "It's the beginning of the day." 14.2 Repetitive Sequences in the Eukaryotic Genome 263As we have mentioned, and as you have seen in the genome sequences we have examined, the eukaryotic genome has some base sequences that are repeated many times. Some of these sequences are present in millions of copies in a single genome. In this section, we will examine the organization and possible roles of these repetitive sequences.14.2.1 Highly repetitive sequences are present in large numbers of copies 263Three types of highly repetitive sequences are found in eukaryotes: Satellites are 5-50 base pairs long, repeated side by side up to a million times. For example, in guinea pigs, the satellite sequence is CCCTAA.* Satellites are usually present at the centromeres of chromosomes. Their role is not known. Minisatellites are 12-100 base pairs long and are repeated several thousand times. Because DNA polymerase tends to slip and make errors in copying these sequences, they are variable in the numbers of copies. For example, one person might have 300, and another, 500. This variation provides a set of molecular genetic markers for identifying an individual. Microsatellites are very short (1-5 base pairs) sequences, present in small clusters of 10-50 copies. They are scattered all over the genome, and have been used in human gene sequencing. While laboratory scientists have made use of these sequences in genetic studies, their roles in eukaryotes are not clear. *When a DNA sequence such as CCCTAA is written, the complementary bases on the other strand are assumed.14.2.2 Telomeres are repetitive sequences at the ends of chromosomes 263There are several types of moderately repetitive sequences in the eukaryotic genome. One type is important in maintaining the ends of chromosomes when DNA is replicated. Recall from Chapter 11 that replication proceeds differently on the two strands of a DNA molecule. Both new strands form in the 5?-to-3? direction, but one strand (the leading strand) grows continuously from one end to the other, while the other (the lagging strand) grows as a series of short Okazaki fragments. In a eukaryotic chromosome, replication must begin with an RNA primer at the 5? end of the forming strand. The leading strand can grow without interruption to the very end, but on the lagging strand, there is nothing beyond the primer in the 5? direction to replace the RNA. So the new chromosome formed after DNA replication lacks a bit of double-stranded DNA at each end. This situation signals DNA repair mechanisms in the cell, and the single-stranded regions, along with some of the intact double-stranded end, is cut off. In this way, the chromosome becomes shorter with each cell division. In many eukaryotes, there are moderately repetitive sequences at the ends of chromosomes called telomeres. In humans, the sequence is TTAGGG, and it is repeated about 2,500 times. These repeats bind special proteins that maintain the stability of chromosome ends. Otherwise, the DNA rapidly breaks down. When human cells are removed from the body and put in a nutritious medium in the laboratory, they will grow and divide. But each chromosome can lose 50-200 bp of telomeric DNA after each round of DNA replication and cell division. This shortening compromises the stability of the chromosomes. After 20-30 divisions, chromosomes are unable to take part in cell division, and the cell dies. The same thing happens in the body, and explains in part why cells do not last the entire lifetime of the organism: Their telomeres shorten. Yet constantly dividing cells, such as bone marrow cells and germ line cells, manage to maintain their moderately repetitive telomeric DNA. An enzyme, appropriately called telomerase, prevents the loss of this DNA by catalyzing the addition of any lost telomeric sequences. Telomerase is made up not only of proteins, but also of an RNA sequence that acts as a template for the telomeric sequence addition. Considerable interest has been generated by the finding that telomerase is expressed in more than 90 percent of human cancers. Telomerase may be an important factor in the ability of cancer cells to divide continuously. Since most normal cells do not have this ability, telomerase is an attractive target for drugs designed to attack tumors specifically. There is also interest in telomerase and aging. When a gene expressing high levels of telomerase is added to human cells in culture, their telomeres do not shorten, and instead of dying after 20-30 cell generations, the cells become immortal. It remains to be seen how this finding relates to the aging of a large organism.14.2.3 Some moderately repetitive sequences are transcribed 264Some moderately repetitive DNA sequences code for tRNA's and rRNA's, which are used in protein synthesis. These RNA's are constantly being made, but even at the maximum rate of transcription, single copies of these sequences would be inadequate to supply the large amounts of these molecules needed by most cells; hence there are multiple copies of the DNA sequences coding for them. Since these moderately repetitive sequences are transcribed into RNA, they are properly termed "genes," and we can speak of rRNA genes and tRNA genes. In mammals, there are four different rRNA molecules that make up the ribosome-the 18S, 5.8S, 28S, and 5S rRNA's.* The 18S, 5.8S, and 28S rRNA's are transcribed from a repeated sequence of DNA as a single precursor, which is twice the size of the three ultimate products. Several posttranscriptional steps cut this precursor into its final three rRNA's and discard the nonuseful, or "spacer," RNA. The DNA coding for these RNA's is moderately repetitive in humans: A total of 280 copies of the sequence are located in clusters on five different chromosomes. *The measure "S" refers to the movement of a molecule in a centrifuge: In general, larger molecules have a higher S value. Other moderately repetitive sequences in mammals are not clustered, but instead are scattered throughout the genome. These DNA's usually are not transcribed and usually are short, about 300 bp long. In humans, half of these DNA's are of a single type, called the Alu family (because they contain a sequence that is recognized by a nuclease enzyme, Alu I). There are 300,000 copies of the Alu family in the genome, and they may act as multiple origins for DNA replication.14.2.4 Transposable elements move about the genome 264Most of the remaining scattered moderately repetitive DNA is not stably integrated into the genome. Instead, these DNA sequences can move from place to place in the genome. Such sequences are called transposable elements, or transposons. There are four main types of transposable elementsin eukaryotes: SINEs (short interspersed elements) are up to 500 bp long and are transcribed, but not translated. LINEs (long interspersed elements) are up to 7,000 bp long, and some are transcribed and translated into proteins. They constitute about 15 percent of the human genome. Both of these elements are present in more than 100,000 copies. They move about the genome in a distinctive way: They make an RNA copy, which acts as a template for the new DNA, which then inserts itself at a new location in the genome. Retrotransposons also make an RNA copy when they move. They are rare in mammals, but are more common in other animals and yeasts. The genetic organization of viral retrotransposons resembles that of retroviruses such as HIV, but these segments lack the genes for protein coats and thus cannot produce viruses. DNA transposons are similar to their prokaryotic counterparts. They do not use an RNA intermediate, but actually move to a new spot in the genome without replicating. What role do these moving sequences play in the cell? There are few answers to this question. The best answer so far seems to be that transposons are cellular parasites that simply replicate themselves. But these replications can lead to the insertion of a transposon at a new location, and this event has important consequences. For example, insertion of a transposon into the coding region of a gene causes a mutation because of the addition of new base pairs. This has been found in rare forms of several human genetic diseases, including hemophilia and muscular dystrophy.
If the insertion of a transposon takes place in the germ line, a gamete with a new mutation results. Such insertions have been found in rare forms of several human genetic diseases, including hemophilia and muscular dystrophy. If the insertion takes place in a somatic cell, cancer may result. If a transposon replicates not just itself but also an adjacent gene, the result may be a gene duplication. A transposon can carry a gene, or a part of it, to another location on a chromosome, shuffling genetic material and creating new genes. Clearly, transposition stirs the genetic pot in the eukaryotic genome and thus contributes to genetic variability. In Chapter 4, we described the endosymbiosis theory of the origin of chloroplasts and mitochondria, which proposes that these organelles are the descendants of once free-living prokaryotes. Transposable elements may have played a role in this process. In living eukaryotes, although the organelles have some DNA, the nucleus contains most of the genes that encode the organelle proteins. If the organelles were once independent, they must originally have contained all of these genes. How did the genes move to the nucleus? The answer may lie in DNA transposition. Genes once in the organelle may have moved to the nucleus by well-known molecular events that still occur today. The DNA that remains in the organelles may be the remnants of more complete prokaryotic genomes. 14.3 The Structures of Protein-Coding Genes 265Like their prokaryotic counterparts, many protein-coding genes in eukaryotes are single-copy DNA sequences. But eukaryotic genes have two distinctive characteristics that are uncommon among prokaryotes. First, they contain noncoding internal sequences, and second, they form gene families with structurally and functionally related cousins in the genome.14.3.1 Protein-coding genes contain noncoding internal and flanking sequences 265Preceding the coding region of a eukaryotic gene is a promoter, where RNA polymerase begins the transcription process. Unlike the prokaryotic enzyme, eukaryotic RNA polymerase does not recognize the promoter sequence by itself, but requires help from other molecules, as we'll see later. At the other end of the gene, after the coding region, is a DNA sequence appropriately called the terminator, which RNA polymerase recognizes as the end point for transcription. Neither the promoter nor the terminator sequence is transcribed into RNA. Eukaryotic protein-coding genes also contain noncoding base sequences, called introns. One or more introns are interspersed with the coding regions -called exons-in most eukaryotic genes. Transcripts of the introns appear in the primary transcript of RNA-the pre-mRNA-within the nucleus, but by the time the mature mRNA exits the organelle, they have been removed. The transcripts of the introns are cut out of the pre-mRNA, and the transcripts of the exons are spliced together. The locations of the introns can be determined by comparing the base sequences of a gene (DNA) with those of its final mRNA. Although direct sequencing of the DNA that codes for an mRNA is the easiest way to map the locations of introns within a gene, nucleic acid hybridization is the method that originally revealed the existence of introns in protein-coding genes. This method, has been crucial to genetic research; in later chapters we will see its use in localizing genes, testing for alleles, localizing mRNA's during development, and many other applications. To examine the relationship between a gene and its transcript, biologists used nucleic hybridization to examine the gene for one of the globin proteins that make up hemoglobin. They first denatured the globin DNA by heating it, then added mature globin mRNA. As expected, the mRNA bound to the DNA by complementary base pairing. The researchers expected to obtain a linear matchup of the mRNA to the globin-coding DNA. They got their wish, in part: There were indeed stretches of RNA-DNA hybridization. But some looped structures were also visible. These loops were the introns, stretches of DNA that did not have complementary bases on the mRNA. Later studies showed that hybridization to the gene using pre-mRNA was complete, and that the introns were indeed transcribed. Somewhere on the path from transcript to mature mRNA, the introns had been removed, and the exons had been spliced together. We will examine this splicing process later in the chapter. Most (but not all) vertebrate genes contain introns, as do many other eukaryotic genes (and even a few prokaryotic ones). Introns interrupt, but do not scramble, the DNA sequence that codes for a polypeptide chain. The base sequence of the exons, taken in order, is exactly complementary to that of the mature mRNA product. The introns, therefore, separate a gene's protein-coding region into distinct parts-the exons. In some cases, the separated exons code for different functional regions, or domains, of the protein. For example, the globin proteins that make up hemoglobin have two domains: one for binding to heme and another for binding to the other globin chains. These two domains are coded for by different exons in the globin gene.14.3.2 Many eukaryotic genes are members of gene families 267About half of all eukaryotic protein-coding genes are present in only one copy in the haploid genome. The rest have multiple copies. Often, inexact, nonfunctional copies of a particular gene, called pseudogenes, are located near it on a chromosome. These duplicates may have arisen by an abnormal event in chromosomal crossing over during meiosis or by the action of retrotransposons. In other cases, however, the genome contains slightly altered copies of a gene that are functional. A set of duplicated or related genes is called a gene family. Some families, such as the ?-globins that are part of hemoglobin, contain only a few members; other families, such as the immunoglobulins that make up antibodies, have hundreds of members. Like the members of any family, the DNA sequences in a gene family are usually different from one another to a certain extent. As long as one member retains the original DNA sequence and thus codes for the proper protein, the other members can mutate slightly, extensively, or not at all. The availability of such extra genes is important for "experiments" in evolution: If the mutated gene is useful, it will be selected for in succeeding generations. If the gene is a total loss (a pseudogene), the functional copy is still there to save the day. The two gene families for the globins are good examples of the gene families found in vertebrates. These proteins are found in hemoglobin, as mentioned earlier, as well as in myoglobin (an oxygen-binding protein present in muscle). The globin genes probably all arose from a single common ancestor gene long ago. In humans, there are three functional members of the alpha-globin (?-globin) family and five in the beta-globin (?-globin) family. In a human adult, each hemoglobin molecule contains the heme pigment held inside four globin polypeptides, two identical ?-globins, and two identical ?-globins. During human development, different members of the ?-globin gene family are expressed at different times and in different tissues 1. This differential gene expression has great physiological significance. For example, ?-globin, a subunit found in the hemoglobin of the fetus (?2?, binds O2 more tightly than adult hemoglobin (?2? does. (Both ?-globin and ?-globin are members of the ?-globin family.) This specialized form of hemoglobin ensures that in the placenta, where the maternal and fetal circulation come near each other, O2 will be transferred from the mother's to the developing child's blood. Just before birth, the synthesis of fetal hemoglobin in the liver stops, and the bone marrow cells take over, making the adult form. In addition to genes that encode proteins, the globin family includes nonfunctional pseudogenes, designated with the Greek letter psi (?). These pseudogenes are the "black sheep" of any gene family: They are experiments in evolution that went wrong. The DNA sequence of a pseudogene may not differ vastly from that of other family members. It may just lack a promoter, for example, and thus cannot be transcribed. Or it may lack the recognition sites for the removal of introns, and thus will be transcribed into pre-mRNA, but not correctly processed into a useful mRNA. In some gene families, pseudogenes outnumber functional genes. However, since some members of the family are functional, there appears to be little selective pressure in evolution to eliminate pseudogenes.14.4 RNA Processing 268As we have seen, the primary RNA transcript (pre-mRNA) of a eukaryotic gene is not the same as the mature mRNA. To produce the mRNA, the primary transcript is processed by the addition of bases at both ends, and by the removal of introns and the joining of exons.14.4.1 The primary transcript of a protein-coding gene is modified at both ends 269Two early steps in the processing of pre-mRNA are the addition of a "cap" at the 5? end and the addition of a "tail" at the 3? end 1. The G cap is a chemically modified molecule of guanosine triphosphate (GTP). It is added to the 5? end as the RNA is transcribed. The cap apparently facilitates the binding of mRNA to the ribosome for translation and protects the mRNA from breaking down. The poly A tail is added to the 3??end of pre-mRNA after a terminal sequence has been removed. Near the 3??end of pre-mRNA, and after the last codon, is the sequence AAUAAA. This sequence acts as a signal for an enzyme to cut the pre-mRNA. Immediately after this cleavage, another enzyme adds 100 to 300 residues of adenine (poly A) to the 3? end of the pre-mRNA. This tail may assist in the export of the mRNA from the nucleus.14.4.2 Splicing removes introns from the primary transcript 269The next step in the processing of eukaryotic pre-mRNA within the nucleus is the removal of the introns. If these RNA regions were not removed, a nonfunctional mRNA, producing an improper amino acid sequence and thus a nonfunctional protein, would result. The process called RNA splicing removes the introns and splices the exons together. As soon as the pre-mRNA is transcribed, it is quickly bound to several small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNP's, commonly pronounced "snurps") There are several types of these RNA-protein particles in the nucleus. At the boundaries between introns and exons are consensus sequences-short stretches of DNA that appear, with little variation, in many different genes. The RNA in one of the snRNP's (called U has a stretch of bases complementary to the consensus sequence at the 5? exon-intron boundary, and binds to the pre-mRNA by complementary base pairing. Another snRNP (U binds to the pre-mRNA near the 3? intron-exon boundary. Next, other proteins bind, forming a large RNA-protein complex called a spliceosome. The spliceosome uses energy from ATP for its assembly. It cuts the RNA, releases the introns, and joins the ends of the exons together to produce mature mRNA. Molecular studies of human diseases have been valuable tools in the investigation of consensus sequences and splicing machinery. Beta thalassemia is a human genetic disease inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. People with this disease make an inadequate amount of the ?-globin subunit that is part of hemoglobin. These people suffer from severe anemia because they have an inadequate supply of red blood cells. In some cases, the genetic mutation that causes the disease occurs at a consensus sequence in the ?-globin gene. Consequently, the pre-mRNA cannot be spliced correctly, and nonfunctional ?-globin mRNA is made. This finding is an excellent example of the use of mutations in determining a cause-and-effect relationship in biology. In the logic of science, merely linking two phenomena (for example, consensus sequences and splicing) does not prove that one is necessary for the other. In an experiment, the scientist alters one phenomenon (for example, the base sequence at the consensus region) to see whether the other event (for example, splicing) occurs. In beta thalassemia, nature has done the experiment for us. After the processing events are completed in the nucleus, the mRNA exits the organelle, apparently through the nuclear pores. A receptor at the nuclear pore recognizes the processed mRNA (or a protein bound to it). Unprocessed or incompletely processed pre-mRNA's remain in the nucleus. 14.5 Transcriptional Control 270In a multicellular organism with specialized cells and tissues, every cell contains every gene in the organism's genome. For development to proceed normally, and for each cell to acquire and maintain its proper function, certain proteins must be synthesized at just the right times and in just the right cells. Thus, the expression of eukaryotic genes must precisely regulated. Regulation of gene expression can occur at many points 1. This section describes the mechanisms that control the transcription of specific genes. These often involve nuclear proteins that alter chromosome function or structure. In some cases, the regulation of transcription involves changes in the DNA itself: Genes are selectively replicated to give more templates to transcribe, or even rearranged on the chromosome. Posttranscriptional events can also regulate gene expression. As we have seen, the processing of pre-mRNA can be controlled after transcription. The transport of the mRNA into the cytoplasm, and how long it remains there, can also be controlled. The translation of mRNA into protein can also be regulated. Finally, once the protein itself is made, its structure can be modified, or it can be broken down and destroyed.14.5.1 Specific genes can be selectively transcribed 270The brain cells and the liver cells of a mouse have some proteins in common and some that are distinctive for each cell type. Yet both cells have the same DNA sequences and, therefore, the same genes. Are the differences in protein content due to differential transcription of genes? Or is it that all the genes are transcribed in both cell types, and a posttranscriptional mechanism is responsible for the differences in proteins? These two alternatives-transcriptional or posttranscriptional control-can be distinguished by examination of the actual RNA sequences made within the nucleus of each cell type. Such analyses indicate that for some proteins, the mechanism of control is differential gene transcription. Both brain and liver cells, for example, transcribe "housekeeping" genes, such as those for glycolysis enzymes and ribosomal RNA's. But liver cells transcribe some genes for liver-specific proteins, and brain cells transcribe some genes for brain-specific proteins. And neither cell type transcribes the genes for proteins that are characteristic of muscle, blood, bone, and the other specialized cell types in the body. Unlike prokaryotes, in which related genes are transcribed as a unit in operons, eukaryotes tend to have solitary genes. Thus, regulating several genes at once requires common control elements in each gene, which allow all of the genes to respond to the same signal. In contrast to the single RNA polymerase in bacteria, eukaryotes have three different RNA polymerases. Each eukaryotic polymerase catalyzes the transcription of a specific type of gene. Only one (RNA polymerase II) transcribes protein-coding genes to mRNA. The other two transcribe the DNA that codes for rRNA (polymerase I) and for tRNA and small nuclear RNA's (polymerase III). The diversity of eukaryotic polymerases is reflected in the diversity of eukaryotic promoters, which tend to be much more variable than prokaryotic promoters. In addition, most eukaryotic genes have regulator, enhancer, and silencer elements (which we will discuss shortly) that can control the rate of transcription. Whether a eukaryotic gene is transcribed depends on the sum total of the effects of all of these elements; thus there are many points of possible control. Finally, the transcription complex in eukaryotes is very different from that of prokaryotes, in which a single peptide subunit can cause RNA polymerase to recognize the promoter. In eukaryotes, many proteins are involved in initiating transcription. We will confine the following discussion to RNA polymerase II, which catalyzes the transcription of most protein-coding genes, but the mechanisms for the other two polymerases are similar.In prokaryotes, the promoter is a sequence of DNA near the 5? end of the coding region of a gene where RNA polymerase begins transcription. A prokaryotic promoter has two essential regions: One, about 40 bp 5? from the initiation point of transcription, is the recognition sequence-the sequence recognized by RNA polymerase. The second, closer to the initiation point, is the TATA box (so called because it is rich in AT base pairs), where DNA begins to denature so that its templates can be exposed. In eukaryotes, there is a TATA box about 25 bp away from the initiation site for transcription, and one or two recognition sequences about 50 to 70 bp 5? from the TATA box. Eukaryotic RNA polymerase II cannot simply bind tightly to the promoter and initiate transcription. Rather, it binds and acts only after various regulatory proteins, called transcription factors, have assembled on the chromosome 1. First, the protein TFIID ("TF" stands for transcription factor) binds to the TATA box. Its binding changes both its own shape and that of the DNA, presenting a new surface that attracts the binding of other transcription factors. RNA polymerase II does not bind until several other proteins have already bound to this complex. Some DNA sequences, such as the TATA box, are common to the promoters of many genes and are recognized by transcription factors that are found in all the cells of an organism. Other sequences in promoters are specific to only a few genes and are recognized by transcription factors found only in certain tissues. These specific transcription factors play an important role in differentiation, the specialization of cells during development. In addition to the promoter, two other regions of DNA bind proteins that activate RNA polymerase. The recently discovered regulator regions are clustered just upstream of the promoter. Various regulator proteins (in the ?-globin gene, seven) may bind to these regions 1. Their net effect is to bind to the adjacent transcription complex and activate it. Much farther away-up to 20,000 bp away-are the enhancer regions. Enhancer regions bind activator proteins, and this binding strongly stimulates the transcription complex. How enhancers can exert this influence from a distance is not clear. In one proposed model, the DNA bends-it is known to do so-so that the activator is in contact with the transcription complex.Finally, there are negative regulatory regions on DNA called silencers, which have the reverse effect of enhancers. Silencers turn off transcription by binding proteins appropriately called repressors. How do these various proteins and DNA sequences-transcription factors, activators, repressors, regulators, enhancers, and silencers-regulate transcription? Apparently, all genes in most tissues can transcribe a small amount of RNA. But the right combination of all the factors is what determines the maximum rate of transcription. In the immature red blood cells of bone marrow, for example, which make a large amount of the protein ?-globin, the transcription of globin genes is stimulated by the binding of 7 regulators and 6 activators. By contrast, in white blood cells in the same bone marrow, these 13 proteins are not made, and they do not bind to their sites adjacent to the ?-globin genes; consequently, these genes are hardly transcribed at all. How do eukaryotic cells coordinate the regulation of several genes whose transcription must be turned on at the same time? In prokaryotes, in which related genes are linked together in an operon, the mechanism is clear: A single regulatory system can regulate several adjacent genes. But in eukaryotes, the several genes whose regulation requires coordination may be on different chromosomes. In such a case, regulation can be achieved if the various genes all have the same regulatory sequences near them, which bind to the same activators and regulators. One of the many examples of this phenomenon is provided by the response of organisms to a stressor-for example, drought in plants. Under conditions of drought stress, a plant must synthesize various proteins, but the genes for these proteins are scattered throughout the genome. However, each of these genes has a specific regulatory sequence near its promoter called the stress response element. The binding of a regulator protein to this element stimulates RNA synthesis 1. In the drought example, the proteins made are involved not only in water conservation, but also in protecting the plant against excess salt in the soil and freezing. This finding has considerable importance for agriculture, in which crops are often grown under less than optimal conditions.A key to transcriptional control in eukaryotes is that transcription factors, regulators, activators, and repressors all bind to specific DNA sequences. In these proteins, there are four common structural themes in the domains that bind to DNA. These themes are called motifs and consist of combinations of structures and special components. The helix-turn-helix motif involves several ?-helices, one of which makes contact with DNA; the others stabilize the structure. This motif appears in the proteins that activate genes involved in embryonic development (homeobox proteins; see Chapter 1 and in the proteins that regulate the development of the immune and central nervous systems. The zinc finger motif has loops that form when a zinc ion is held by the amino acids cysteine and histidine. It occurs most notably in the receptors for steroid hormones. The leucine zipper motif places hydrophobic leucine residues on one side of a polypeptide. Their presence allows two polypeptide chains to interact (zipper) hydrophobically, setting up the positively charged residues just past the zipper to bind to DNA. This motif occurs in many DNA-binding proteins-for example, the transcription factor AP-1, which binds near promoters of genes involved in mammalian cell growth and division. Overactivity of AP-1 has been linked to several types of cancer. The helix-loop-helix motif  is two helices separated by a loop. This region is adjacent to a stretch of amino acids that interact with DNA. This motif occurs in the activator proteins that bind to enhancers for the immunoglobulin genes that synthesize antibodies, as well as in the transcription factors involved in muscle protein synthesis.14.5.2 Genes can be inactivated by chromatin structure 273Chromatin contains nucleosomes and many other chromosomal proteins. The packaging of DNA by these nuclear proteins can make DNA physically inaccessible to RNA polymerase and the rest of the transcription apparatus, much as the binding of a repressor to the operator in the prokaryotic lac operon prevents transcription. Both local and global chromatin structure affect transcription. Nucleosomes inhibit both the initiation and elongation of transcription. To alleviate these blocks, cells recruit two protein complexes. One binds upstream of the initiation site, disaggregating the nucleosomes so that the large initiation complex can bind and begin transcription. The other binds once transcription is under way, allowing the transcription complex to move through these nucleosomes. These processes are called chromatin remodeling. Two kinds of chromatin can be distinguished by staining of the interphase nucleus: euchromatin and heterochromatin. Euchromatin is diffuse and stains lightly; it contains the DNA that is transcribed into mRNA. Heterochromatin stains densely and is generally not transcribed; any genes that it contains are thus inactivated. Perhaps the most dramatic example of heterochromatin is the inactive X chromosome of mammals. A normal female mammal has two X chromosomes; a normal male, an X and a Y. The Y chromosome has only a few genes that are also present on the X, and is largely transcriptionally inactive in most cells. So there is a great difference between females and males in the "dosage" of X chromosome genes. In other words, each female cell has two copies of the genes on the X chromosome, and therefore has the potential to produce twice as much protein product of these genes as a male has. Yet X-linked gene expression is generally the same in males and females. How can this happen? The answer was found in 1961 independently by Mary Lyon, Liane Russell, and Ernest Beutler. They suggested that one of the X chromosomes in each cell of an XX female is transcriptionally inactivated early in embryonic development. That copy of the X remains inactive in that cell, and in all the cells arising from it. In a given cell, the "choice" of which X in the pair of Xs to inactivate is usually random. Recall that one of the Xs in a female comes from her father and one from her mother. Thus, in one embryonic cell, the paternal X might be the one remaining active in mRNA synthesis, but in a neighboring cell, the maternal X might be active.Interphase cells of XX females have a single, stainable nuclear body called a Barr body, after its discoverer, Murray Barr 1. This clump of heterochromatin, which is not present in males, is the inactivated X chromosome. The number of Barr bodies in each nucleus is equal to the number of X chromosomes minus one (the one represents the X chromosome that remains transcriptionally active). So a female with the normal two X chromosomes will have one Barr body, one with three X's will have two, an XXXX female will have three, and an XXY male will have one. We may infer that the interphase cells of each person, male or female, have a single active X chromosome, making the dosage of the expressed X chromosome genes constant across both sexes. The mechanism of X inactivation involves chromosome condensation that makes the DNA sequences physically unavailable to the transcription machinery. One method may be the addition of a methyl group (;sbCH to the 5? position of cytosine on DNA. Such methylation seems to be most prevalent in transcriptionally inactive genes. For example, most of the DNA of the inactive X chromosome has many cytosines methylated, while few of them on the active X are methylated. Methylated DNA appears to bind certain chromosomal proteins, which may be responsible for heterochromatin formation. But this seems to occur after the actual inactivation event, making methylation a way to keep genes turned off. The otherwise inactive X chromosome has one gene that is only lightly methylated and is transcriptionally active. This gene is called XIST (for X inactivation specific transcript), and it is heavily methylated on, and not transcribed from, the other, "active" X chromosome. The RNA transcribed from XIST does not leave the nucleus and is not an mRNA. Instead, it appears to bind to the X chromosome that transcribes it, and this binding somehow leads to a spreading of inactivation along the chromosome.14.5.3 A DNA sequence can move to a new location to activate transcription 275In some instances, gene expression is regulated by the movement of a gene to a new location on the chromosome. An example of this mechanism is found in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The haploid single cells of this fungus exist in two mating types, a and ?, which fuse to form a diploid zygote. Although all yeast cells have an allele for each of these types, the allele that is expressed determines the mating type of the cell. In some yeasts, the mating type changes with almost every cell division cycle. How does it change so rapidly? The yeast cell keeps the two different alleles (coding for type ? and type a) at separate locations on its chromosome, away from a third site, the MAT locus. The two mating type alleles are usually transcriptionally silent because a repressor protein binds to them. However, when a copy of the ? or a allele is inserted at the MAT region, the gene for proteins of the appropriate mating type is transcribed. A change in mating type requires three steps: First, a new DNA copy of the nonexpressed allele is made (if the cell is now ?, the new copy will be the a allele). Second, the current occupant of the MAT region (in this case, the ? DNA) is removed by an enzyme. Third, the new allele (a) is inserted at the MAT region and transcribed. The a proteins are now made, and the mating type is changed. DNA rearrangement is also important in producing the highly variable proteins that make up the human repertoire of antibodies, and in cancer, when inactive genes move to be adjacent to active promoters.14.5.4 Selective gene amplification results in more templates for transcription 275Another way for one cell to make more of a certain gene product than another cell does is to have more copies of the appropriate gene and to transcribe them all. The process of creating more copies of a specific gene in order to increase transcription is called gene amplification. As described earlier, the genes that code for three of the four human ribosomal RNA's are linked together in a unit, and this unit is repeated several hundred times in the genome to provide multiple templates for rRNA synthesis (rRNA is the most abundant kind of RNA in the cell). In somecircumstances, however, even this moderate repetition is not enough to satisfy the demands of the cell. For example, the mature eggs of frogs and fishes have up to a trillion ribosomes. These ribosomes are used for the massive protein synthesis that follows fertilization. The cell that differentiates into the egg contains fewer than 1,000 copies of the rRNA gene cluster, and would take 50 years to make a trillion ribosomes if it transcribed those rRNA genes at peak efficiency. How does the egg end up with so many ribosomes (and so much rRNA)? The egg cell solves this problem by selectively amplifying its rRNA gene clusters until there are more than a million copies. In fact, this gene complex goes from being 0.2 percent of the total genome DNA to being 68 percent. These million copies transcribed at maximum rate 1 are just enough to make the necessary trillion ribosomes in a few days. The mechanism for selective overreplication of a single gene is not clearly understood, but it has important medical implications. As Chapter 17 will show, in some cancers, a cancer-causing gene called an oncogene becomes amplified. Also, in some tumors treated with a drug that targets a single protein, amplification of the gene for the target protein leads to an excess of that protein, and the cell becomes resistant to the prescribed dose of the drug.14.6 Posttranscriptional Control 276There are many ways to regulate the presence of mature mRNA in a cell even after a precursor has been transcribed. As we saw earlier, pre-mRNA can be processed by cutting out the introns and splicing the exons together. If the exons of the pre-mRNA are recombined in different ways by alternate splicing, different proteins can be synthesized.The longevity of mRNA in the cytoplasm can also be regulated. The longer an mRNA exists in the cytoplasm, the more of its coded protein can be made.14.6.1 Different mRNA's can be made from the same gene by alternate splicing 276Most primary transcripts contain several introns. We have seen how the splicing mechanism recognizes the boundaries between exons and introns. What would happen if the ?-globin pre-mRNA, which has two introns, was spliced from the start of the first intron to the end of the second? Not only the two introns but also the middle exon would be spliced out. An entirely new protein (certainly not a ?-globin) would be made, and the functions of normal ?-globin would be lost. Alternate splicing can be a deliberate mechanism for generating a family of different proteins from a single gene. For example, a single pre-mRNA for the structural protein tropomyosin is alternateivly spliced to give five different mRNA's and five different forms of tropomyosin found in five different tissues: skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, fibroblast, liver, and brain.14.6.2 The stability of mRNA can be regulated 276DNA, as the genetic material, must remain stable, and there are elaborate mechanisms for repairing it if it becomes damaged. RNA has no such repair system. After it arrives in the cytoplasm, mRNA is subject to breakdown catalyzed by ribonucleases, which exist both in the cytoplasm and in lysosomes. But not all eukaryotic mRNA's have the same life span. Differences in the stabilities of mRNA's provide another mechanism for posttranscriptional control of protein synthesis. The less time an mRNA spends in the cytoplasm, the less of its protein can be translated. Tubulin is a protein that polymerizes to form microtubules, a component of the cytoskeleton. When a large pool of free tubulin is available in the cytoplasm, there is no particular need for the cell to make more of it. Under these conditions, some tubulin molecules bind to tubulin mRNA. This binding makes the mRNA especially susceptible to breakdown, and less tubulin is made. 14.7 Translational and Posttranslational Control 276Is the amount of a protein in a cell determined by the amount of its mRNA? Recently, a survey was made of the relationships between mRNA's and proteins in yeast cells. Dozens of genes were surveyed. For about a third of them, the relationship between mRNA and protein held: more of one led to more of the other. But for two-thirds of the proteins, there was no apparent relationship. Their concentration in the cell must be determined by factors acting after the mRNA is made. Just as proteins can control the synthesis of mRNA by binding to DNA, they can also control the translation of mRNA by binding to mRNA in the cytoplasm. This mode of control is especially important in long-lived mRNA's. A cell must not continue to make proteins that it does not need. For example, mammalian cells respond to certain stimuli by making cyclins, which stimulate cell cycle events. If the mRNA for a cyclin is still in the cytoplasm and available for translation long after the cyclin is needed, cyclin will be made and released inappropriately. Its presence might cause a target cell population to divide inappropriately, forming a tumor.14.7.1 The translation of mRNA can be controlled 277One way to control translation is by the capping mechanism on mRNA. As already noted, mRNA is capped at its 5??end by a modified guanosine molecule 1. Messenger RNA's that have unmodified caps are not translated. For example, stored mRNA in the oocyte of the tobacco hornworm moth has the guanosine added to its 5? end, but the G is not modified. Hence, this stored mRNA is not translated. However, after fertilization, the cap is modified, allowing the mRNA to be translated to produce proteins needed for early embryogenesis. Free iron ions (Fe2+) within a mammalian cell are bound by a storage protein, ferritin. When iron is in excess, ferritin synthesis rises dramatically. Yet the amount of ferritin mRNA remains constant. The increase in ferritin synthesis is due to an increased rate of mRNA translation. When the iron level in the cell is low, a translational repressor protein binds to ferritin mRNA and prevents its translation by blocking its attachment to a ribosome. When iron levels rise, the excess iron binds to the repressor and alters its three-dimensional structure, causing it to detach from the mRNA, and translation of ferritin proceeds. Translational control also acts in the synthesis of hemoglobin. As we described earlier, hemoglobin consists of four polypeptide chains and a nonprotein pigment, heme. If heme synthesis does not equal globin synthesis, some polypeptide chains stay free in the cell, waiting for a heme partner. Excess heme in the cell increases the rate of translation of globin mRNA by removing a block to the initiation of translation at the ribosome, helping to maintain the balance.14.7.2 The proteasome controls the longevity of proteins after translation 277We have considered how gene expression may be regulated by the control of transcription, RNA processing, and translation. However, the story does not end here, because most gene products-proteins-are modified after translation. Some of these changes are permanent, such as the addition of sugars (glycosylation), the addition of phosphate groups, or the removal of a signal sequence after a protein has crossed a membrane 1. An important way to regulate the action of a protein in a cell is to regulate its lifetime in the cell. Proteins involved in cell division (e.g., the cyclins) are hydrolyzed at just the right moment to time the sequence of events. Proteins identified for breakdown are often covalently linked to a 76-amino acid protein called ubiquitin (so called because it is ubiquitous, or widespread). The protein-ubiquitin complex then binds to a huge complex of several dozen polypeptide chains called a proteasome 2. The entryway to this "molecular chamber of doom" is a hollow cylinder, with ATPase activity, that cuts off the ubiquitin for recycling and unfolds its targeted protein victim. The protein then passes by three different proteases (thus the name of the complex) that digest it into small peptides and amino acids. The cellular concentrations of many proteins are determined not by differential transcription of their genes, but by their degradation in proteasomes. For example, cyclins are degraded at just the right time during the cell cycle. Transcription factors are broken down after they are used, lest the affected genes be always "on." Abnormal proteins are often targeted for destruction by a quality control mechanism. Human papilloma viruses, which cause cervical cancer, target the cell division inhibitory protein p53 for proteasomal degradation, so that unregulated cell division-and cancer-results.15 Cell Signaling and CommunicationCarol had intended to complete the report summarizing her semester's biology lab project long before it was due; it would, after all, count for significant points toward her grade. But what with her other courses and a few interesting distractions, she kept putting off the report until "next week." Finally, at 9:30 the night before it was due, she sat down to create the 20-page report. By 11:00 she realized she still had hours of work to do. She made a frantic call to her lab partner, asking him to provide her with some data from one of their experiments. And Carol filled the coffee-brewing machine in her dorm room, knowing she would need a "caffeine jolt" to keep her awake so she could finish the job. To understand how a "caffeine jolt" works, we must understand the pathways by which the body's cells respond to certain signals in their environment. The signals might be chemicals traveling between brain cells, or hormones produced in response to an outside event. There are three sequential processes involved in the cell's response to any signal. First, the signal binds to a receptor protein. Second, the binding of the signal causes a message to be conveyed to the cell's cytoplasm and amplified. Third, the cell changes its activity in response to the signal. Caffeine acts in different ways in diferent tissues. First, a tired person's brain produces adenosine molecules that bind to specific receptor proteins, resulting in decreased brain activity and drowsiness. Caffeine's molecular structure is similar to that of adenosine, so it occupies the adenosine receptors without inhibiting brain cell function, and alertness is restored. Then, in the heart and liver, caffeine stimulates a pathway inside cells so that they do not need hormonal stimulation. In the heart, the result is an increased rate of beating; the liver, meanwhile, is stimulated to release glucose into the bloodstream. We begin this chapter with a discussion of signals that affect cells. As you will see, these range from chemicals such as hormones to physical entities such as light. Whatever the signal, it will affect a cell only if that cell has a receptor protein that binds to the signal. In addition to binding the signal, the receptor must somehow communicate to the rest of the cell that binding has occurred. This process of signal transduction often involves special small molecules called second messengers, which initiate a series of events that amplify the signal. As a result, the third phase-alteration of cell function-may involve many instances of the same event, such as the opening of an ion channel in the plasma membrane or increased transcription of a number of genes. We close with a description of how animal and plant cells communicate with one another directly through specialized channels in their adjacent plasma membranes.15.1 Signals 279Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells process information from their environment. This information can be in the form of a physical stimulus, such as the light reaching your eye as you read this book, or chemicals that bathe a cell, such as lactose in the medium surrounding E coli. It may come from outside the organism, such as the ions dissolved in the water that bathes plant roots, or from a neighboring cell within the organism, as in the heart, where thousands of cells contract in unison by transmitting signals to one another. Of course, the mere presence of a signal does not mean that a cell will respond, just as you do not pay close attention to every sound in your environment as you study. To respond, the cell must have a specific receptor protein that can bind to the signal. In this section, we describe some of the signals different cells respond to and look at one model system of signal transduction.15.1.1 Cells receive signals from the physical environment and from other cells 280The physical environment is full of signals. Our sense organs allow us to respond to light, odors, touch, and sound. Bacteria and protists respond to even minute chemical changes in their environment. Plants respond to light as a signal. For example, at sunset, at night, or in the shade, not only the amount of sunlight, but also the spectrum of light reaching the surface of the Earth, differs from that of full sunlight in the daytime. These variations are signals that affect plant growth and reproduction. Even magnetism can be a signal: Some bacteria and birds orient themselves to the Earth's magnetic poles, like a needle on a compass. But a cell inside a large organism is far from the exterior environment. Instead, its environment is other cells and the extracellular fluids that bathe all the cells of a multicellular organism. Cells receive their nutrients from, and pass their wastes into, extracellular fluids. Cells also receive signals-mostly chemical signals-from their extracellular fluid environment. Most of these chemical signals come from other cells. In animal cells, they include hormones (Chapter 4, neurotransmitters (Chapter 4, and chemical messages from the immune system (Chapter 1. Cells also respond to chemical signals coming from the environment via the digestive system and respiratory system. And cells can respond to chemicals, such as CO2 and H+, whose presence in the extracellular fluids results from the metabolic activities of other cells. Inside a large organism, chemical signals reach a target cell by local diffusion or by circulation within the blood. Autocrine signals are signals that affect the cells that make them. Paracrine signals are signals that diffuse to nearby cells. Signals to distant cells usually travel through the circulatory system. The biological signals cells receive are diverse. In each case, the cell must be able to receive or sense the signal and respond to it. Depending on the cell and the signal, the responses range from entering the cell division cycle to heal a wound, to moving to a new location in the embryo to form a tissue, to releasing enzymes that digest food, to sending messages to the brain about the book you are reading. Clearly, signaling underlies a lot of biology. The whole process, from signal detection to final response, is called a signal transduction pathway.15.1.2 Signaling involves a receptor, transduction, and effects 281In Chapter 13, we saw that bacteria respond to changes in nutrients in their environment by altering their transcription of genes, as in the lac operon. In addition to responding tosuch changes, these same bacteria must be able to sense and respond to non-nutritive changes in their environment, such as changes in osmotic concentration. For example, if the solute concentration around E coli rises far above that inside the cell, the law of diffusion tells us that water will diffuse out of the cell and solutes into the cell. Since the cell must maintain homeostasis in its cytoplasm, it must perceive and respond to this environmental change. The way in which this one-celled organism responds to such signals has much in common with signaling in more complex animals and plants. The receptor protein in E coli for osmotic changes is called EnvZ. It is a transmembrane protein that extends through the bacterium's plasma membrane into the space between the plasma membrane and a highly porous outer membrane lying just inside the cell wall. When the solute concentration of the extracellular environment rises, so does the concentration in the environment between the two membranes. This change in its aqueous medium causes the part of the receptor protein sticking into the intermembrane space to undergo a conformational change. We saw in Chapter 6 that changing the tertiary structure of one part of a protein often leads to changes in distant parts of the protein. In the case of the bacterial EnvZ receptor, the conformational change in the intermembrane region of the protein is transmitted to the region that lies in the bacterium's cytoplasm. This change initiates the events of signal transduction. EnvZ becomes an active protein kinase, which catalyzes the addition of a phosphate group from ATP to one of EnvZ's own histidine residues. In other words, EnvZ phosphorylates itself. The charged phosphate group added to the histidine causes the cytoplasmic tail of the EnvZ protein to change its shape again. It now binds to a second protein, OmpR, which takes the phosphate group from EnvZ. OmpR also changes its structure due to this phosphorylation. This change is a key event in signaling for two reasons. First, the signal on the outside of the cell has now been transduced to a protein totally within the cell's cytoplasm. Second, OmpR can do something, and that is to bind to a promoter on E coli DNA adjacent to the DNA coding for the protein OmpF. This binding begins the final phase of this signaling pathway: the effect of the signal, which is some alteration in cell function. Phosphorylated OmpR has the correct three-dimensional structure to bind to DNA at the ompF promoter, resulting in an increase in transcription of that gene. Translation of ompF mRNA results in the production of OmpF protein, which is inserted into the outer membrane and prevents solutes from entering the intermembrane space. Thus the E coli cell can go on behaving just as if the environment has a normal osmotic concentration. It is important to highlight the major features of this prokaryotic system, as they will reappear in many other signal transduction systems in animals and plants: A receptor changes its conformation upon interacting with the signal. A conformational change exposes a protein kinase activity. Phosphorylation alters the function of a protein. Transcription factors are activated. Altered synthesis of specific proteins occurs. Protein action alters cell activity. Signal transduction pathways featuring these six systems occur in all types of organisms. The emergence of these systems was an important event in the evolution of cellular life, as they allow the organism to react to and survive in a rapidly changing environment. 15.2 Receptors 282While a given cell is bombarded with many signals, it responds to only a few of them. The reason for this is that any given cell makes receptors for only some signals. Which cells make which receptors is genetically determined: If a cell transcribes the gene encoding a particular receptor and the resulting mRNA is translated, the cell will have that receptor. A receptor protein binds to a signal in much the same way as an enzyme binds to a substrate or a membrane transport protein binds to  the molecule it is transporting.15.2.1 Receptors have specific binding sites for their signals 282A signaling molecule, usually called a ligand, fits into a site on its receptor much like a substrate fits into the active site of an enzyme. Whether the receptor protrudes from the plasma membrane surface or is located in the cytoplasm, the result of ligand binding is the same: the receptor protein changes its three-dimensional structure and initiates a cellular response. The ligand does not contribute further to this response. In fact, the ligand usually is not metabolized into useful products. Its role is purely to "knock on the door." This is in sharp contrast to enzyme-substrate interactions, in which the whole purpose is to change to the substrate into a useful product. Receptors bind to their ligands according to chemistry's law of mass action: R + L <reverse arrow> RL. This means that the binding is reversible, although for most ligand/receptor complexes, the equilibrium point is far to the right-that is, favoring binding. Release of the ligand is important because if it does not happen, the receptor will be continuously stimulated. Just as with enzymes, inhibitors can bind to the ligand site on a receptor protein. Both natural and artificial inhibitors of receptor binding are important in medicine.15.2.2 There are several types of receptors 283A major division among receptors is in their cellular location, which largely depends on the nature of their ligands. The chemistry of signals is quite variable , but they can be divided into two classes: those that are nonpolar, and can cross the plasma membrane and enter the cell, and those that are large or polar, and cannot cross the membrane. Estrogen, for example, is a steroid and can easily diffuse across the plasma membrane and enter the cell; it binds to a receptor inside the cytoplasm. Insulin, on the other hand, is a protein hormone that cannot diffuse through the plasma membrane; instead, it binds to a receptor that is a transmembrane protein with an extracellular binding region. In more complex eukaryotes, there are three types of receptors on plasma membranes: ion channels, protein kinases, and G protein-linked receptors. In the plasma membranes of many types of cells, there are channel proteins that can be open or closed. These ion channels act as "gates," allowing ions such as Na+, K+, Ca2+, or Cl- to enter or leave the cell. The gate-opening mechanism is an alteration in the three-dimensional structure of the channel protein upon ligand binding. Each ion channel has its own signal. These signals include sensory stimuli, such as light and sound, voltage differences across the plasma membrane, and chemical ligands such as small molecules and hormones. An example of a gated ion channel is the acetylcholine receptor. This receptor is located at the plasma membranes of vertebrate skeletal muscle cells and binds the ligand acetylcholine, which is released from nerve cells. When two molecules of acetylcholine bind to the receptor, it opens for about a thousandth of a second. This is enough time for Na+, which is more concentrated outside the cell than inside, to rush into the cell. The change in Na+ concentration in the cell ultimately results in muscle contraction. Right after the channel opens, the ligand is released from the receptor. This makes the receptor (and the cell) responsive to the next signal, so that the muscle can contract again.Like the activated EnvZ protein of E coli, some eukaryotic receptor proteins become kinases when they are  activated: that is, they catalyze the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to a protein. The targets for the protein kinase activity are both the receptor itself and cytoplasmic molecules, which then act to change the cell's activities. While histidine is phosphorylated by EnvZ in E coli, the amino acid targeted by the protein kinase receptors of animal cells is usually tyrosine. In plants, either serine or threonine is phosphorylated. Insulin is a protein hormone made by the mammalian pancreas. The receptor for insulin is a protein consisting of two copies each of two different polypeptide subunits. As with acetylcholine, two molecules of insulin must bind to the receptor. After binding insulin, the receptor changes its shape to expose a cytoplasmic protein kinase active site. Like the EnvZ receptor described above, the insulin receptor self-phosphorylates. Then, as a protein kinase signal, it targets certain cytoplasmic proteins, appropriately called the insulin response substrates. These proteins then initiate many cell responses, including the insertion of glucose transporters into the plasma membrane. The third category of eukaryotic plasma membrane receptor is the seven-spanning G protein-linked receptors. This long name identifies a fascinating group of receptors, all of which are composed of a single protein with seven regions that pass through the lipid bilayer, separated by short loops that extend either outside or inside the cell. Ligand binding changes the shape of the receptor's cytoplasmic region, opening up a binding site for a mobile membrane protein. This membrane protein, known as a G protein, has two important binding sites: one for the G protein-linked receptor, and the other for the nucleotide GDP/GTP. G proteins have several polypeptide subunits. When the G protein binds to the activated receptor, it also binds GTP to one of its subunits. At the same time, the ligand is released from the extracellular side of the receptor. The GTP-bound subunit of the G protein now separates from the parent G protein, diffusing in the plane of the lipid bilayer until it encounters an effector protein to which it can bind. Effector proteins are what their name implies: They cause an effect. The binding of the GTP-bearing G protein subunit activates the effector-which may be an ion channel or an enzyme-thereby causing changes in cell function.
After binding to the effector protein, the GTP on the G protein is hydrolyzed to GDP. The now inactive G protein subunit separates from the effector protein. The G protein subunit must form a complex with another subunit before binding to yet another activated receptor. When this activated receptor is bound, the G protein exchanges its GDP for GTP, and the cycle begins again. By means of their diffusing subunits, G proteins can either activate or inhibit an effector. An example of an activating response involves the receptor for epinephrine (adrenaline), the famous "fight-or-flight" hormone made by the adrenal gland in response to stress or heavy exercise. In heart muscle, this hormone binds to its G protein-linked receptor, causing a G protein to become activated. The GTP-bound subunit then activates a membrane-bound enzyme to produce a small molecule, cyclic AMP, which has many effects on the cell, including glucose mobilization for energy and muscle contraction. An example of G protein-mediated inhibition occurs when the same hormone, epinephrine, binds to its receptor in the smooth muscle cells surrounding blood vessels lining the digestive tract. Again, the epinephrine-bound receptor changes its shape and binds a G protein, which then binds GTP, and the G protein subunit with its GTP binds to the target enzyme. But in this case, the enzyme is inhibited instead of being activated. As a result, the muscles relax, and the blood vessel diameter increases, allowing more nutrients to be carried away from the digestive system to the rest of the body. Thus the same signal and initial signaling mechanism can have different consequences in different cells, depending on the nature of the responding cell.cytoplasmic receptors. Not all signals act at the plasma membrane. Some signals diffuse across the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane and enter the cytoplasm. In these cases, the receptor protein lies inside the cytoplasm. Steroid hormones in animals, for example, enter the cytoplasm and bind to steroid hormone receptors. Binding to the ligand causes the receptor to change its shape so that it can enter the cell nucleus, where it acts as a transcription factor. But this general view is somewhat simplified. The receptor for the hormone cortisol, for example, is bound to a chaperone protein, which blocks it from entering the nucleus. Binding of the hormone causes the receptor to change its shape so that the chaperone is released. This allows the receptor, which is a transcription factor, to fold into an appropriate configuration for entering the nucleus and initiating transcription.15.3 Transducers 285The same signal may produce different responses in different tissues.  Acetylcholine, for example, can bind to receptors on skeletal muscle cells, where it stimulates muscle contraction, but on heart muscle cells, it slows contraction. These different responses to the same ligand/receptor complex are mediated by the events of signal transduction. These events, which are critical to the cell's response, may be either direct or indirect. Direct transduction is a property of the receptor itself and occurs at the plasma membrane. In indirect transduction, which is more common, another molecule, termed a second messenger, mediates the interaction between receptor binding and cellular reaction. In neither case is transduction a single event. Rather, the signal initiates a cascade of events, in which proteins interact with other proteins until the final responses are achieved.15.3.1 Protein kinase cascades amplify a response to receptor binding 286We have seen that when a signal binds to a protein kinase receptor, the receptor changes its structure to expose a protein kinase active site, which catalyzes the phosphorylation of target proteins. This process is an example of direct signal transduction. Protein kinase receptors are important in binding ligands that stimulate cell division in both plants and animals. In Chapter 9, we described growth factors that were external inducers of the cell cycle. These factors stimulate cell division by binding to protein kinase receptors. The complete signal transduction pathway that occurs after a protein kinase receptor is activated was worked out from studies on a cell that went wrong. Many human bladder cancers contain an abnormal protein called Ras (so named because it was first isolated from a rat sarcoma tumor). Investigations of these bladder cancers showed that the ras protein was a G protein, but was always active because it was permanently bound to GTP. So the ras protein caused continuous tumor cell division. If the cancer cells' Ras protein was inhibited, the tumor cells stopped dividing. This discovery has led to a major effort to develop specific Ras inhibitors for cancer treatment. What does Ras do in normal, noncancerous cells? When scientists treated cells in a laboratory dish with both a Ras inhibitor and a growth factor, the expected cell division did not occur. Since growth factor binding is the first event in stimulating cell division, these results meant that Ras, like other G proteins, must be an intermediary between signal (growth factor) and response (cell division). After this discovery, the challenge was to work out what the activated growth factor receptor did to Ras, and what Ras did to stimulate further events in signal transduction. This signaling pathway has been worked out, and it is an excellent example of a more general phenomenon, a protein kinase cascade. Such cascades are key to the external regulation of many cellular activities. Indeed, as we saw in Chapter 14, the eukaryotic genome codes for hundreds, even thousands, of such kinases. The unbound receptors for growth factors exist in the plasma membrane as separate polypeptide chains (subunits). When the growth factor signal binds to a subunit, it associates with another subunit to form a dimer, which changes shape to expose a protein kinase active site. The kinase activity sets off a series of events, activating several other protein kinases in turn. The final phosphorylated, activated protein-MAP kinase-moves into the nucleus and phosphorylates target proteins necessary for cell division.
Is the protein kinase cascade pathway universal in eukaryotes? Genome sequencing of the plant Arabidopsis has revealed proteins with strong homologies to many of the actors in the mammalian pathway. A number of proteins that resemble tyrosine kinase receptors are also present. There is even a Ras-like protein. The functions of this pathway in Arabidopsis are under investigation. Protein kinase cascades are very useful for signal transduction for three reasons: At each step in the cascade of events, the signal is amplified. Because each newly activated protein kinase is an enzyme, each can catalyze the phosphorylation of many target proteins. The information from the signal that was originally at the plasma membrane is communicated to the nucleus. The multitude of steps provides some specificity to the process. As we have seen with epinephrine, signal binding and receptor activation do not result in the same response in all cells. Different target proteins at every step in the cascade can provide variability of response.15.3.2 Cyclic AMP is a common second messenger 287As we have seen, protein kinase receptors stimulate the protein kinase cascade right at the plasma membrane. However, the stimulation of events in the cell is more often indirect. In a series of clever experiments, Earl Sutherland, Edwin Krebs, and Edmond Fischer showed that in many cases, there is a small, water-soluble chemical messenger between the membrane receptor and cytoplasmic events. These researchers were investigating the activation of the liver enzyme phosphorylase by the hormone epinephrine. Phosphorylase catalyzes the breakdown of glycogen stored in the liver so that it can be released to the blood to fuel the fight-or-flight response. The researchers found that phosphorylase could be activated in liver cells that had been broken open, but only if the entire cell contents, including the plasma membrane, were present. Epinephrine bound to the plasma membrane and phosphorylase was present in the cytoplasm. So they tried the steps of this experiment in sequence: First, they incubated membranes of broken liver cells with epinephrine. Then, they removed the membranes, but kept the solution in which the membranes had been bathed. When they added this solution to the cytoplasm, the phosphorylase enzyme there became activated! Hormone binding to the membrane receptor had caused the production of a small water-soluble molecule that then diffused to the cytoplasm, where it activated the enzyme. This small molecule was identified as cyclic AMP (cAMP), which we also encountered in the lac operon regulatory system in E coli, where cAMP was working as a second messenger. Second messengers are defined as substances released to the cytoplasm after the first messenger-the signal-binds to its receptor. In contrast to the uniqueness of receptor binding, second messengers affect many processes in the cell, and allow a cell to respond to a single event at the plasma membrane with many events inside the cell. Like the kinase cascade, second messengers amplify the signal-a single epinephrine molecule leads to the production of several dozen molecules of cAMP, which then activate many enzyme targets. Adenylyl cyclase, the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of cAMP from ATP, is located on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane of target cells 1. Usually, it is activated by the binding of G proteins, themselves activated by receptors. Second messengers do not have enzymatic activity; rather, they act as cofactors or allosteric regulators of target proteins. In the case of cAMP, there are two major target types. In many kinds of sensory cells, cAMP binds to ion channels to cause them to open. A second major target type is cytoplasmic. Cyclic AMP binds to an enzyme such as a protein kinase, whose active site gets exposed as a result. The sequential activation of yet another kinase ensues, leading to the final effects in the cell.15.3.3 Two second messengers are derived from lipids 287Membrane phospholipids are involved in signal transduction in addition to their roles as structural components of the plasma membrane. When certain phospholipids are hydrolyzed into their component parts by enzymes called phospholipases, second messengers are formed. The best-studied of these come from hydrolysis of the lipid phosphatidylinositol (PTI), which has two fatty acid chains (both diacylglycerol, or DAG) embedded in the plasma membrane and a hydrophilic inositol group (inositol triphosphate-IP projecting into the cytoplasm. There are over two dozen signals whose actions are mediated by the products of PTI hydrolysis. Once again, the receptors involved are often linked to G proteins. The activated G proteins diffuse through the plane of the plasma membrane and in turn activate an enzyme, phospholipase C. This enzyme cleaves off the IP3 from PTI, leaving the glycerol and the two attached fatty acids embedded in the lipid bilayer. IP3 and DAG are both second messengers and have different modes of action that build on each other.  DAG activates a membrane-bound enzyme, protein kinase C (PKC), in much the same way that cAMP activates protein kinase A. PKC is dependent on Ca2+ (hence the "C"), and this is where the IP3 comes in. IP3 is charged and diffuses through the cytoplasm to theendoplasmic reticulum, where it causes the release of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm. There, in combination with DAG, the Ca2+ causes PKC to become active. PKC then phosphorylates a wide variety of proteins, leading to the ultimate response of the cell.15.3.4 Calcium ions are involved in many transduction pathways 288Calcium ions can also act as a second messenger. They are scarce in most cells, with a cytoplasmic concentration of only about 0.1 ?M, while the concentrations of Ca2+ outside the cell and within the ER are usually much higher. This difference is maintained by active transport proteins at the plasma and ER membranes that pump the ion out of the cytoplasm. In contrast to cAMP and the lipid second messengers, the level of intracellular Ca2+ cannot be increased by making more of it. Instead, the opening and closing of channels and the action of membrane pumps regulate levels of the ion in a cellular compartment. DAVID: REWRITE PARAGRAPH FOR NEW PHOTO (FERTLIZAION) There are many signals that can cause Ca2+ channels to open, including IP3 (see the previous section) and the arrival of a nerve impulse at a muscle cell. Whatever the signal, the open channels result in a dramatic increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration, up to a hundredfold within a fraction of a second 1. As we saw above, this ion activates protein kinase C. In addition, Ca2+ controls other ion channels and stimulates secretion by exocytosis. A distinctive aspect of Ca2+ signaling is that the ion can stimulate its own release from intracellular stores. For example, in some plant leaf cells, the hormone abscisic acid binds to  gated Ca2+ channels and opens them, causing the ion to rush into the cells. This influx is not enough to trigger the cell's response, however. The ion binds to Ca2+ channels in the endoplasmic reticulum and vacuolar membranes, causing those organelles to release their Ca2+ stores as well. In some cases, Ca2+ ions act via a calcium-binding protein called calmodulin, and it is the Ca2+-calmodulin complex that performs cellular functions by binding to target proteins. Calmodulin, which is present in many cells, has four binding sites for Ca2+. When the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration is low, calmodulin does not bind enough of it to become activated. But when the cell is stimulated by a signal and the Ca2+ level rises,  all four binding sites are filled. Then the calmodulin changes shape and binds to a number of cellular targets, activating them in turn. One such target is a protein kinase in smooth muscle cells that phosphorylates the muscle protein myosin, initiating muscle contraction.15.3.5 Nitric oxide is a gas that can act as a second messenger 289Pharmacologist Robert Furchgott, at the State University of New York in Brooklyn, was investigating how acetylcholine causes smooth muscles lining blood vessels to relax, thus allowing more blood to flow to certain organs. Acetylcholine appeared to stimulate the IP3 signal transduction system to produce an influx of Ca2+, which led to an increase in the level of an unusual second messenger, cyclic GMP (cGMP). This nucleotide bound to a protein kinase, which then stimulated a kinase cascade leading to muscle relaxation. So far, the pathway seemed straightforward. But while this pathway seemed to work in intact animals, it did not work on isolated strips of artery tissue. When Furchgott switched to tubular sections of artery, however, signal transduction did occur. There turned out to be a crucial difference between these two tissue preparations: In the strips, the delicate inner layer of cells that lines the blood vessel had been lost. Furchgott hypothesized that this layer, the endothelium, was making something that diffused into the muscle cells and was needed for their response to acetylcholine. The substance was not easy to isolate. It seemed to break down quickly, with a half-life (the time in which half of it disappeared) of 5 seconds. It turned out to be a gas, nitric oxide (NO), that had always been thought of as a toxic air pollutant! In the body, NO is made via an enzyme, NO synthase, in endothelial cells. This enzyme is activated by Ca2+, which enters the cell through a channel opened by IP3, released after acetylcholine binds to its receptor. The NO formed is chemically very unstable and although it diffuses readily, it does not get too far. Conveniently, the endothelial cells are close to the smooth muscle cells, where NO acts as a second messenger, stimulating the formation of cGMP. The spectacular discovery of NO as a second messenger explained the action of nitroglycerin, a drug that has been used for over a century to treat angina, the chest pain caused by insufficient blood flow to the heart. Nitroglycerin releases NO, which results in relaxation of the blood vessels and increases blood flow.

15.3.6 Signal transduction is highly regulated 290There are several ways in which cells can regulate the activity of a signal transduction mechanism. The concentration of NO, which breaks down quickly, can be regulated only by how much of it is made. The level of Ca2+, on the other hand, is determined by both membrane pumps and ion channels. For protein kinase cascades, G proteins, and cAMP, there are enzymes that convert the activated form back to its inactivated precursor: Protein phosphatases remove the phosphate groups from phosphorylated proteins. GTPases convert the GTP on an active G protein back to GDP, inactivating the protein. cAMP phosphodiesterase converts cAMP into its precursor, AMP, which has no second messenger activity. These three inactivation systems are themselves under controls. For example, the major protein phosphatase can be inhibited by a protein whose activity is determined by phosphorylation by protein kinase A, which itself is under control of cAMP. So the cAMP pathway can intersect with the protein kinase cascade. On the other hand, some cAMP phosphodiesterases are stimulated by Ca2+, thus showing an interaction between these two signaling pathways. The caffeine in coffee acts as a stimulant in part because it inhibits cAMP phosphodiesterase. This increases the level of cAMP in the brain, where it acts as a second messenger to stimulate nervous activity. 15.4 Effects 290We have seen that the binding of a signal to its receptor initiates the response of a cell to an environmental signal, and how the direct or indirect transduction of this signal to the cytoplasm of the cell amplifies the stimulus. In this section, we consider the third and final step in the process, the actual effects of the signal on cell function. These effects are primarily the opening of membrane channels, changes in the activities of enzymes, and differential gene transcription.15.4.1 Membrane channels are opened 290The opening of ion channels is of great importance when the nervous system responds to a signal. Sensory nerve cells of the sense organs, for example, become stimulated through the opening of ion channels. We will focus here on one such signal transduction pathway, that for the sense of smell. The sense of smell is well developed in mammals, which have an amazing 1,000 genes for odorant receptors, the largest gene family known. Each of the thousands of nerve cells in the nose expresses one of these receptors. The identification of which chemical signal, or odorant, activates which receptor is just getting under way. When an odorant molecule binds to its receptor, a G protein becomes activated, which in turns activates adenylyl cyclase to form the second messenger cAMP. This molecule then binds to an ion channel, causing it to open. The resulting influx of Na+ causes the nerve cell to become stimulated, and it sends a signal back to the brain that a particular odor is present.15.4.2 Enzyme activities are changed 291Proteins will change their shape, and their functioning, if they are modified either covalently or  noncovalently. We have seen examples of both types of modificaton in signal transduction. Protein kinases add phosphate groups to a target protein, and the covalent change alters the protein's shape. Cyclic AMP binds to target proteins allosterically, and this noncovalent interaction changes the protein's shape. In both cases, previously inaccessible active sites are exposed, and the target protein goes on to perform a cellular role. The G protein-mediated protein kinase cascade stimulated by epinephrine in liver cells results in the phosphorylation of two key enzymes in glycogen metabolism 1. One of them, glycogen synthase, catalyzes the joining of glucose molecules to synthesize the energy-storing molecule glycogen, but it is inactivated by phosphorylation. Thus the epinephrine signal prevents glucose from being stored in glycogen. On the other hand, phosphorylase kinase becomes activated when a phosphate group is added to it, and goes on to stimulate a protein kinase cascade that ultimately leads to the activation by phosphorylation of glycogen phosphorylase, the other key enzyme in glucose metabolism. This enzyme liberates glucose molecules from glycogen. Thus the same signaling pathway inhibits the storage of glucose as glycogen and promotes the release of glucose through glycogen breakdown. As we mentioned earlier, the released glucose fuels the ATP-requiring fight-or-flight response to epinephrine.Phosphorylation by activated protein kinase A alters the activities of many other proteins, including enzymes involved in glycolysis, a ribosomal protein, and a receptor for a neurotransmitter. Likewise, Ca2+ binds to many proteins in the cell, changing their activities. In addition to protein kinase C, Ca2+-activated targets include proteins that bind to and organize actin microfilaments and microtubules, as well as troponin, a modulator of muscle contraction.15.4.3 Different genes are transcribed 291Cell surface receptors are involved in activating a broad range of gene expression responses. For example, the Ras signaling pathway ends in the nucleus. The final protein kinase enters the nucleus and phosphorylates a leucine zipper protein called AP-1. This activated protein stimulates the transcription of a number of genes involved in cell proliferation. As we described earlier in this chapter, lipid-soluble hormones can diffuse directly through the plasma membrane and meet their receptors in the cytoplasm. Binding of the ligand allows the ligand/receptor complex to enter the nucleus, where it binds to hormone-responsive elements at the promoters of a number of genes. In some cases, transcription is stimulated, and in others it is inhibited. In plants, light acts as a signal to initiate the formation of chloroplasts. Between this signal and response is a transcription-mediated signaling pathway. In bright sunlight, red wavelengths are absorbed by a receptor protein called phytochrome. We will say more about this important receptor later in the book, but for now it is important to note that it is activated by red light. The activated phytochrome binds to cytoplasmic regulatory proteins, which enter the nucleus and bind to promoters for genes involved in the synthesis of important chloroplast proteins. Synthesis of these proteins is the key to the plant greening. 15.5 Direct Intercellular Communication 292Up to now, we have described how signals from the environment can influence a cell. But the environment of a cell in a multicellular organism is more than the extracellular medium. Most cells are in contact with their neighbors. In Chapter 5, we described how cells adhere to one another by the noncovalent interactions of recognition proteins protruding from the cell surface. There are also specialized cell junctions, such as tight junctions and desmosomes, that help "cement" the cells together. However, as we know from our own neighbors (and roommates), just being in proximity does not necessarily mean that there is functional communication. In this section, we look at the specialized junctions between cells that allow them to signal one another. In animals, these are gap junctions; in plants, they are plasmodesmata.15.5.1 Animal cells communicate by gap junctions 292Gap junctions are channels between adjacent cells that occur in many multicellular animals, occupying up to 25 percent of the area of the plasma membrane. Gap junctions traverse the 2-nm space between the plasma membranes of two cells (the "gap") by means of thin molecular channels called connexons. The walls of these tubes are composed of six subunits of an integral membrane protein appropriately named connexin. In two cells close to each another, two  connexons come together, forming a channel that links the two cytoplasms. There may be hundreds of these channels between a cell and its neighbors. The channels are quite narrow, about 1.5 nm in diameter. This is far too small for the passage of large molecules, such as proteins. But it is wide enough to allow small signal molecules and ions to pass between the cells. Experiments in which a labeled signal molecule or ion is injected into one cell show that it can readily pass into the adjacent cells if they are connected by gap junctions. Gap junctions permit metabolic cooperation among linked cells. Such cooperation assures the sharing of important small molecules such as ATP, metabolic intermediates, amino acids, and coenzymes between cells. It may also assure that concentrations of ions and small molecules are similar in linked cells, thereby maintaining equivalent regulation of metabolism. It is not clear how important this is in many tissues, but it is known to be vital in some. For example, in the lens of the mammalian eye, only the cells at the periphery are close enough to the blood supply to allow diffusion of nutrients and wastes. But because lens cells are connected by large numbers of gap junctions, material can diffuse between them rapidly and efficiently. There is evidence that signal molecules such as hormones and second messengers such as cAMP and IP3 can move through gap junctions. If this were true, only a few cells would need to have receptors binding a signal in order for the stimulus to spread throughout the tissue. In this way, a tissue could have a coordinated response to the signal.15.5.2 Plant cells communicate by plasmodesmata 292Instead of gap junctions, plants have plasmodesmata, which are membrane-lined bridges spanning the thick cell walls that separate plant cells from one another. A typical plant cell has several thousand plasmodesmata. Plasmodesmata differ from gap junctions in one fundamental way: Unlike gap junctions, in which the wall of the channel is made of integral proteins from the adjacent plasma membranes, plasmodesmata are lined by the fused plasma membranes themselves. Plant biologists are so familiar with the notion of a tissue as cells interconnected in this way that they refer to these continuous cytoplasms as a symplast. The actual diameter of a plasmodesma is about 6 nm, far larger than the gap junction channel. But the actual space available for diffusion is about the same-1.5 nm-as with gap junctions. A look at the interior of the plasmodesma gives the reason for this reduction in pore size: A tubule called the desmotubule, derived from the endoplasmic reticulum, fills up most of the opening of the plasmodesma. So, typically, only small metabolites and ions move between plant cells. This fact is important physiologically to plants, which lack tiny circulatory vessels like capillaries to bring gases and nutrients near enough to every cell. Diffusion from cell to cell through plasma membranes is probably inadequate for hormonal responses in plants. Instead, they rely on more rapid diffusion through plasmodesmata to ensure that all cells of a tissue respond to a signal at the same time. In C4 plants, there are abundant plasmodesmata between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, helping to rapidly move the fixed carbon in the former cell type to the latter. A similar transport system, found at the junctions of nonvascular tissues and phloem, conducts organic solutes throughout the plant. Plasmodesmata are not merely passive channels, but can be regulated. Plant viruses may infect cells at one location, then spread rapidly through a plant organ by plasmodesmata until they reach the plant's vascular tissue (circulatory system). These viruses, and even their RNA, would appear to be many times too large to pass through the plasmodesmal channel. But they get through, apparently by making "movement proteins" that increase the pore size temporarily while attached to the viral genome. Similar movement proteins are involved in transporting mRNAs between plant cells. This finding opens up the possibility of long-distance regulation of translation.16 Development: Differential Gene ExpressionIt is a day in the not-too-distant future. Decades of eating fatty foods, combined with a genetically based tendency to deposit cholesterol in his arteries, finally catch up with 60-year-old Don: A blood clot closes off the blood flow to part of his heart, leading to a heart attack and irreversible tissue damage.Today, Don would be faced with a long period of rehabilitation, taking medications to manage his weakened heart. Instead, his physicians inject undifferentiated embryonic stem cells directly into his heart. The cells differentiate into cardiac muscle cells, replacing the ones that were lost to oxygen starvation, and full heart function is restored. Embryonic stem cells, which are cells from a very young mammalian embryo, are able to form an entire organism if separated from one another. These cells can be removed from an embryo and maintained indefinitely in the laboratory. If they could be genetically altered to make them acceptable for transplants, these cells could be a source of tissue replacement not only for damaged hearts, but for the pancreas in people with diabetes and the brain in people with Alzheimer's disease. While the application of stem cells to medicine is not yet possible, considerable new knowledge about the molecular biology of development has emerged. Much of this knowledge has come from studies on organisms such as the fruit fly Drosophila, the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans, frogs, sea urchins, and a flowering plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. As we saw in Chapter 14, the genomes of eukaryotes are surprisingly similar, and the cellular and molecular principles underlying their development also turn out to be similar. Thus discoveries from one organism aid us in understanding other organisms, including ourselves. Two major conclusions have emerged from studies of development. The first is that all types of somatic cells-all cells except gametes-in an organism retain all of the genes that were present in the fertilized egg. In other words, cell differentiation does not result from a loss of DNA. The second is that cellular changes during development and cell differentiation result from differential expression of genes. During development, the various mechanisms of transcriptional and translational control described in Chapter 14 and the signaling mechanisms described in Chapter 15 work together to produce a complex organism. 16.1 The Processes of Development 294Development is a process in which an organism undergoes a series of progressive changes, taking on the successive forms that characterize its life cycle. In its earliest stages of development, a plant or animal is called an embryo. Sometimes the embryo is contained within a protective structure such as a seed coat, an eggshell, or a uterus. An embryo does not photosynthesize or feed actively; instead, it obtains its food from its mother directly or indirectly (by way of nutrients stored in the egg, for example). A series of embryonic stages  may precede the birth of the new, independent organism. Development continues throughout an organism's life, ceasing only when the organism dies.16.1.1 Development consists of growth, differentiation, and morphogenesis 295Growth (increase in size) occurs through cell division and cell expansion. It continues throughout the individual's life in some species, but reaches a more or less stable end point in others. Repeated mitotic divisions generate the multicellular body. In plants, unless the daughter cells become longer (expand) after they form, the embryo does not grow very much; thus in plant development, cell expansion begins shortly after the first divisions of the fertilized egg. In animal development, on the other hand, such cell expansion is often slow to begin: The animal embryo may consist of thousands of cells before it becomes larger than the fertilized egg. Differentiation is the generation of cellular specializations; that is, differentiation defines the specific structure and function of a cell. Mitosis, as we have seen, produces daughter nuclei that are chromosomally and genetically identical to the nucleus that divides to produce them. However, the cells of an animal or plant body are obviously not all identical in structure or function. The human body, with its approximately 100 trillion (101 cells, consists of about 200 functionally distinct cell types-for example, muscle cells, blood cells, and nerve cells. This apparent contradiction results from regulation of the expression of various parts of the genome. When the embryo consists of only a few cells, each cell has the potential to develop in many different ways. As development proceeds, however, the possibilities available to individual cells gradually narrow, until each cell's fate is fully determined and the cell has differentiated. Whereas differentiation gives rise to cells of different kinds, morphogenesis (literally, "creation of form") gives rise to the shape of the multicellular body and its organs. Morphogenesis results from pattern formation, the organization of differentiated tissues into specific structures. In plant development, cells are constrained by cell walls and do not move around, so organized division and expansion of cells are the major processes that build the plant body. In animals, cell movements are very important in morphogenesis. And in both plants and animals, programmed cell death is essential to orderly development. In plants and animals alike, differentiation and morphogenesis result ultimately from the regulated activities of genes and their products, as well as the interplay of extracellular signals and their transduction in target cells.16.1.2 As development proceeds, cells become more and more specialized 295Marking specific cells of an early embryo with stains reveals which adult structures are derived from which part of the embryo. For instance, the frog embryo normally becomes part of the skin of the tadpole larva. However, if we cut out a piece from this region and transplant it to another location on an early embryo, the type of tissue it becomes is determined by its new environment. The developmental potential of such cells-that is, their range of possible development-is thus greater than their actual fate, which is limited to what normally develops. Does embryonic tissue retain its broad developmental potential? Generally speaking, the answer is no. The developmental potential of cells becomes restricted fairly early in normal development. Tissue from a later-stage frog embryo, for example, if taken from a region fated to develop into brain, becomes brain tissue even if transplanted to parts of an early-stage embryo destined to become other structures. The tissue of the later-stage embryo is thus said to be determined: Its fate has been sealed, regardless of its surroundings. By contrast, the younger transplant tissue has not yet become determined.16.1.3 Determination precedes differentiation 296Determination, the commitment of a cell to a particular fate, is a process influenced by the extracellular environment and the contents of the cell acting on the cell's genome. Determination is not something that is visible under the microscope-cells do not change appearance when they become determined. Determination is followed by differentiation, the actual changes in biochemistry, structure, and function that result in cells of different types. Differentiation often involves a change in appearance as well as function. Determination precedes differentiation. Determination is a commitment; the final realization of this commitment is differentiation. 16.2 The Role of Differential Gene Expression in Cell Differentiation 296Differentiated cells are recognizably different from one another, sometimes visually as well as in their protein products. Certain cells in our hair follicles continuously produce keratin, the protein that makes up hair, nails, feathers, and porcupine quills. Other cell types in the body do not produce keratin. In the hair follicle cells, the gene that encodes keratin is transcribed; in most other cells in our body, that gene is not transcribed.  Activation of the keratin gene is a key step in the differentiation of the hair follicle cells. Generalizing from examples like this one, we may say that differentiation results from differential gene expression-that is, from the differential regulation of transcription, posttranscriptional events such as mRNA splicing, and translation. Because the fertilized egg, or zygote, has the ability to give rise to every type of cell in the adult body, we say it is totipotent. Its genome contains instructions for all the structures and functions that will arise throughout the life cycle. Later in the development of animals (and probably to a lesser extent in plants), the cellular descendants of the zygote lose their totipotency and become determined-that is, committed to form only certain parts of the embryo. Determined cells differentiate into specific types of specialized cells, such as nerve cells or muscle cells. When a cell becomes specialized, it is said to have differentiated.16.2.1 Differentiation usually does not include an irreversible change in the genome 296Differentiation is irreversible in certain types of cells. Examples include the mammalian red blood cell, which loses its nucleus during development, and the tracheid, a water-conducting cell in vascular plants. Tracheid development culminates in the death of the cell, leaving only the pitted cell walls that formed while the cell was alive. In both of these extreme cases, the irreversibility of differentiation can be explained by the absence of a nucleus. Generalizing about mature cells that retain functional nuclei is more difficult. We tend to think of plant differentiation as reversible and of animal differentiation as irreversible, but this is not a hard-and-fast rule. Why is differentiation apparently reversible in some cells but not in others? At some stage of development, do changes within the nucleus permanently commit a cell to specialization? For both higher plants and animals, the answer appears to be no. Under the right environmental circumstances, differentiation is reversible. A food storage cell in a carrot root faces a dark future. It cannot photosynthesize or give rise to new carrot plants. However, if we isolate that cell from the root, maintain it in a suitable nutrient medium, and provide it with appropriate chemical cues, we can "fool" the cell into acting as if it were a fertilized egg. It can divide and give rise to a normal carrot embryo and, eventually, a complete plant. Since the new plant is genetically identical to the somatic cell from which it came, we call the plant a clone. The ability to clone an entire carrot plant from a differentiated root cell indicates that the cell contains the entire carrot genome and that it can express the appropriate genes in the right sequence. Many cells from other plant species show similar behavior in the laboratory, and this ability to generate a whole plant from a single cell has been invaluable in agricultural biotechnology. These experiments with plants establish that a somatic cell is totipotent. A more direct demonstration that all the genetic material is present in differentiated cells has come from nuclear transplant experiments. Such experiments were first done on frogs by Robert Briggs and Thomas King, who asked whether the nuclei of early frog embryos had lost the ability to do what the totipotent zygote nucleus could do. They first removed the nucleus from an unfertilized egg, thus forming an enucleated egg. Then, with a very fine glass tube, they punctured a cell from an early embryo and drew up part of its contents, including the nucleus, which they injected into the enucleated egg.
More than 80 percent of these nuclear transplant operations resulted in the formation, from the egg and its new nucleus, of a normal early embryo. Of these embryos, more than half developed into normal tadpoles and, ultimately, normal adult frogs. These experiments showed that no information is lost from the nuclei of cells as they pass through the early stages of embryonic development, and that the cytoplasmic environment around a nucleus can modify its fate. Similar experiments have been performed on rhesus monkeys, in which a single cell can be removed from an 8-celled embryo and fused with an enucleated egg, allowing the nucleus of the embryonic cell to enter the egg cytoplasm. The resulting cell acts like a zygote, forming an embryo, which can be implanted into a foster mother, who ultimately gives birth to a normal monkey. Each of the remaining 7 cells from the original embryo can similarly give rise to offspring by the same cell fusion technique. In humans, the totipotency of early embryonic cells permits both genetic screening and in vitro fertilization. An 8-cell human embryo can be isolated in the laboratory and a single cell removed to determine whether a harmful genetic condition is present (Chapter 1. Each remaining cell, being totipotent, can be stimulated to divide and form an embryo, which can be implanted into a foster mother, where it develops into an infant. Later frog nuclear transplant experiments by John Gurdon showed that a donor nucleus obtained from later stages in the frog's life could occasionally give rise to a normal tadpole, again showing totipotency. But successful cloning of animals was very difficult until the late 1990s, when Ian Wilmut and his colleagues at a biotechnology company in Scotland used the cell fusion procedure to clone sheep. Previous attempts to produce mammals by this method had worked, as in the rhesus monkey case, only if the donor nucleus was from an early embryo. Apparently, when mammalian donor cells were in the G2 phase of the cell cycle and were fused with egg cytoplasm also in G2, some extra DNA replication took place that created havoc with the cell cycle in the egg when it attempted to divide.
Wilmut took differentiated cells from a ewe's udder and starved them of nutrients for a week, thus halting the cells in G1. After one of these cells was fused with an enucleated egg from a different ewe, mitotic inducers in the egg cytoplasm were able to stimulate the donor nucleus to enter S phase, and the rest of the cell cycle proceeded normally. After several cell divisions, the resulting early embryo was transplanted into the womb of a surrogate mother. Out of 277 successful attempts to fuse adult cells with enucleated eggs, one lamb, named Dolly, survived to be born. DNA analyses confirmed that Dolly was genetically identical to the ewe from whose udder the donor nucleus had been obtained. The purpose of Wilmut's experiment was to clone sheep that have been genetically programmed to produce products such as pharmaceuticals in their milk. The cloning procedure could make multiple, identical copies of sheep that are reliable producers of a drug such as alpha-1-antitrypsin, which is used to treat people with cystic fibrosis. The trick of starving donor cells for cloning has been applied to other mammals. Mice have been cloned using the cells lining the egg as a source of donor nuclei. Cows have been cloned to preserve a rare breed in New Zealand. Genetically engineered goats have been cloned to produce several proteins useful to people in their milk. Needless to say, this flurry of cloning has touched off a flurry of controversy. Cloning is not a new scientific concept; the idea of totipotency was accepted long before Dolly was born. Rather, it is an impressive technical achievement. An example of nuclear totipotency gone awry occurs in a human tumor called a teratocarcinoma. Here, a differentiated cell dedifferentiates to form an unspecialized cell. Then it divides, forming a tumor, as occurs in most cancers. But some cells in the tumor redifferentiate to form specialized tissue arrangements. So the tumor can be a single mass of cells inside the abdomen, with some of the cells forming kidney tubes, others hair, and still others teeth! How this occurs is not clear.16.2.2 Stem cells can be induced to differentiate by environmental signals 299Totipotency implies that a differentiated cell stays that way because of its environment, and that appropriate environmental changes could result in a new pattern of differentiation. In normal development, a complex series of signals and their transduction results in the patterns of differentiation we see in a newborn organism. If these signals could be described in enough detail, we should be able to understand how any cell type becomes any other. Stem cells are undifferentiated, dividing cells that are found in adult animal tissues that need frequent cell replacement, such as skin, the inner lining of the intestine, and the blood system. As they divide, stem cells produce cells that differentiate to replace dead cells and maintain tissue homeostasis. In the body, stem cells have limited abilities to differentiate. The stem cells in bone marrow, for example, produce the various types of red and white blood cells, while stem cells in the nervous system produce the various differentiated nerve cells. Can one kind of stem cell be manipulated by its environment to produce cells that differentiate into cells of another tissue? The answer appears to be yes. For example, when stem cells of the brain were transplanted into the bone marrow of mice whose bone marrow stem cells had been depleted, they proceeded to act like bone marrow stem cells, producing blood cells. In the reverse experiment, bone marrow stem cells were implanted into the brains of mice, where they formed brain cells. These experiments indicate that the environment-presumably intercellular signals-determines what a stem cell will do. The stem cell populations closest to totipotency are not the ones in adults, but those of the early embryo. In mice, these embryonic stem cells can be removed from an early embryo (called a blastocyst) and then induced to differentiate in some particular way. Normally, these cells are formed a few days after fertilization, and soon become determined as to what their fate will be in the developing embryo. Before then, however, they are virtually totipotent. Such cells can be grown indefinitely in the laboratory, and when injected back into a mouse blastocyst, will mix with the resident cells and differentiate to form all the cells of the mouse. This kind of experiment shows that they have not lost any of their developmental potential while growing in the laboratory. Embryonic stem cells growing in the laboratory can be induced to differentiate if the right signal is provided. For example, treatment of mouse embryonic stem cells with a derivative of vitamin A causes them to form nerve cells, while other growth factors induce them to form blood cells, again demonstrating their developmental potential and the roles of environmental signals. This finding raises the possibility of using stem cell cultures as sources of differentiated cells for clinical medicine. A key advance toward this use has been the ability to grow human embryonic stem cells in the laboratory. The age of custom-made cells to replace ones lost to disease or injury is rapidly approaching.16.2.3 Genes are differentially expressed in cell differentiation 299Experiments such as nuclear transplants in frogs and sheep-as well as plant cell cloning-point to the conclusion of genome constancy or equivalence in all somatic cells of an organism. Molecular experiments have provided even more convincing evidence. For example, the gene for (-globin, one of the protein components of hemoglobin, is present and expressed in red blood cells as they form in the bone marrow of mammals. Is the same gene also present-but unexpressed-in nerve cells in the brain, which do not make hemoglobin? Nucleic acid hybridization  can provide an answer. A probe for the (-globin gene can be applied to DNA from both brain cells and immature red blood cells (recall that mature red blood cells lose their nuclei and DNA). In both cases, the probe finds its complement, showing that the (-globin gene is present in both types of cells.On the other hand, if the probe is applied to cellular mRNA rather than cellular DNA, it finds (-globin mRNA only in the red blood cells, and not in the brain cells. This result shows that the gene is expressed in only one of the two tissues. Many similar experiments have shown convincingly that differentiated cells lose none of the genes that were present in the fertilized egg. What leads to this differential gene expression? One well-studied example is the conversion of undifferentiated muscle precursor cells, called myoblasts, into the large, multinucleated cells that make up mammalian skeletal muscle cells (called muscle fibers). The key event that starts this conversion is the expression of MyoD1 (Myoblast Determining Gene. The protein product of this gene is a transcription factor (MyoD with a helix-loop-helix domain that not only binds to promoters of the muscle-determining genes to stimulate their transcription, but also acts on its own promoter  to keep its levels high in the myoblasts and in their descendants. Strong evidence for the controlling role of MyoD1 comes from experiments in which a gene containing an active promoter adjacent to MyoD1 DNA is injected into the precursors of other cell types. For example, if MyoD1 DNA is put into fat cell precursors, they are reprogrammed to become muscle cells. Genes such as MyoD1, which code for proteins that direct fundamental decisions in development, often by regulating genes on other chromosomes usually code for transcription factors. 16.3 The Role of Polarity in Cell Determination 300What initially stimulates the MyoD1 promoter to begin transcription is not clear, but a chemical signal clearly is involved. In general, two overall mechanisms for producing such signals  have been found. In cytoplasmic segregation, a factor within eggs, zygotes, or precursor cells is unequally distributed in the cytoplasm.  After cell division, the factor ends up in some cells or regions of cells and not others. In induction, a factor is actively produced and secreted by certain cells to induce other cells to differentiate. Polarity-the difference of one end of an embryo from the other-is obvious in development. Our heads are distinct from our feet, and the distal ends of our arms (wrists and fingers) differ from the proximal ends (shoulders). An animal's polarity develops early, even in the egg itself. Yolk may be distributed asymmetrically in the egg and the embryo. In addition, other chemical substances may be confined to specific parts of the egg, or may be more concentrated at one pole than at the other. In some animals, the original polar distribution of materials in the egg's cytoplasm changes as a result of fertilization. As cell division proceeds, the resulting cells contain unequal amounts of the materials that were not distributed uniformly in the zygote. As we learned from the work on cloning, cell nuclei do not always undergo irreversible changes during early development; thus we can explain some embryological events on the basis of the cytoplasmic differences in cells. Even a structure as apparently uniform as a sea urchin egg has polarity. A striking difference between cells can be demonstrated very early in embryonic sea urchin development. The development of embryos that have been divided in half at the 8-cell stage depends on how they are separated. If the embryo is split into "left" and "right" halves, with each half containing cells from both the upper and the lower halves, normal-shaped but dwarfed larvae develop. If, however, the cut separates the upper four cells from the lower four, the result is different. The upper four cells develop into an abnormal early embryo with large cilia at one end that cannot form a larva. The lower four cells develop into  small, somewhat misshapen larvae with an oversized gut. These results shows that for fully normal development, factors from both the upper and lower parts of the embryo are necessary.This and many other experiments established that  certain materials, called cytoplasmic determinants, are distributed unequally in the egg cytoplasm, and that these materials play a role in directing the embryonic development of many organisms. 16.4 The Role of Embryonic Induction in Cell Determination 301Experimental work on developing embryos has clearly established that in many cases, the fates of particular tissues are determined by interactions with other specific tissues in the embryo. In developing animal embryos there are many such instances of induction, in which one tissue causes an adjacent tissue to develop in a particular manner. These effects are mediated by intercellular biochemical communication-that is, signal transduction mechanisms. We will describe two examples of such induction: one in the developing vertebrate eye, and the other in a developing reproductive structure in the nematode C. elegans.16.4.1 Tissues direct the development of their neighbors by secreting inducers 301The development of the lens in the vertebrate eye is a classic example of induction. In a frog embryo, the developing forebrain bulges out at both sides to form the optic vesicles, which expand until they come into contact with the cells at the surface of the head. The surface tissue in the region of contact with the optic vesicles thickens, forming a lens placode. The lens placode bends inward, folds over on itself, and ultimately detaches from the surface to produce a structure that will develop into the lens. If the growing optic vesicle is cut away before it contacts the surface cells, no lens forms. Placing an impermeable barrier between the optic vesicle and the surface cells also prevents the lens from forming. These observations suggest that the surface tissue begins to develop into a lens when it receives a signal-an embryonic inducer-from the optic vesicle. The interaction of tissues in eye development is a two-way street: There is a "dialogue" between the developing optic vesicle and the surface tissue. The optic vesicle induces lens development, and the developing lens determines the size of the optic cup that forms from the optic vesicle. If head surface tissue from a frog species with small eyes is grafted over the optic vesicle of one with large eyes, both lens and optic cup are of intermediate size. The developing lens also induces the surface tissue over it to develop into a cornea, a specialized layer that allows light to pass through and enter the eye. Thus a chain of inductive interactions participates in the development of the parts required to make an eye. Induction triggers a sequence of gene expression in the responding cells. Tissues do not induce themselves; rather, different tissues interact and molecularly induce each other. We will return to embryonic induction in Chapter 43.16.4.2 Single cells can induce changes in their neighbors 302The tiny nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans is used as a model organism in many biological studies, but it is especially useful for studying development. It normally lives in the soil, where it feeds on bacteria, but can also grow in the laboratory if supplied with them. The entire process of development from egg to larva takes about 8 hours at 25¡C. It is easily observed using a low-magnification dissecting microscope because the body covering is transparent. Because C. elegans is easy to culture, develops rapidly, and is easily observed, it is a favorite experimental organism of developmental biologists. The development of C. elegans does not vary, so it has been possible to identify the source of each of the 959 somatic cells of the adult form. The adult nematode is hermaphroditic, containing both male and female reproductive organs. It lays eggs through a pore called the vulva on the ventral surface. During development, a single cell, called the anchor cell, induces the vulva to form. If the anchor cell is destroyed by laser surgery, no vulva forms. The eggs develop inside the parent, and a "bag of worms" that eventually consume the parent results. The anchor cell controls the fates of six cells on the animal's ventral surface through two molecular switches. Each of these cells has three possible fates: it may become a primary vulval precursor, a secondary vulval precursor, or simply part of the worm's surface-an epidermal cell. The anchor cell produces an inducer that diffuses out of the cell and interacts with adjacent cells. Cells that receive enough of the inducer become vulval precursors; cells slightly farther from the anchor cell become epidermis. The first molecular switch, controlled by the inducer from the anchor cell, determines whether a cell takes the "track" toward becoming part of the vulva or the track toward becoming epidermis. The cell closest to the anchor cell, having received the most inducer, differentiates into the primary vulval precursor and apparently produces its own inducer, which acts on the two neighboring cells and directs them to become secondary vulval precursors. Thus the primary vulval precursor cell controls a second molecular switch, determining whether a vulval precursor will take the primary track or the secondary track. The two inducers control the activation or inactivation of specific genes in the responding cells. There is an important lesson to draw from this example: Much of development is controlled by molecular switches that allow a cell to proceed down one of two alternative tracks. One challenge for the developmental biologist is to find these molecular switches and determine how they work. The primary inducer for the C. elegans vulva appears to be a growth factor homologous to the mammalian epidermal growth factor (EGF). The nematode growth factor, called LIN-3, binds to a receptor on the surface of a vulval precursor cell. This binding sets in motion a signal  transduction cascade involving the ras protein and MAP kinases. The end result is increased transcription of genes involved in the differentiation of vulval cells. 16.5 The Role of Pattern Formation in Organ Development 302Pattern formation, the spatial organization of a tissue or organism, is inextricably linked to morphogenesis, the appearance of body form. The differentiation of cells is beginning to be understood in terms of molecular events, but how do molecular events contribute to the organization of multitudes of cells into specific body parts, such as a leaf, a flower, a shoulder blade, or a tear duct?16.5.1 Some cells are programmed to die 302Apoptosis is programmed cell death, a series of events caused by the expression of certain genes. Some of these "death genes" have been pinpointed, and related ones have been found in organisms as diverse as nematodes and humans. Apoptosis is vital to the normal development of all animals. For example, the nematode C. elegans produces precisely 1,090 somatic cells as it develops from a fertilized egg to an adult. But 131 of these cells die. The sequential expression of two genes called ced-4 and ced-3 (for cell death) appears to control this process. In the nervous system, for example, there are 302 nerve cells that come from 405 precursors; thus 103 cells undergo apoptosis. If the protein coded for by either ced-3 or ced-4 is nonfunctional, all 405 cells form neurons, and disorganization results. A third gene, ced-9, codes for an inhibitor of apoptosis: that is, its protein blocks the function of the ced-4 gene. So, where cell death is required, ced-3 and ced-4 are active and ced-9 is inactive; where cell death does not occur, the reverse is true. Remarkably, a similar system of cell death genes acts in humans. During early development, human hands and feet look like tiny paddles-the fingers and toes are linked by webbing. Between days 41 and 56 of development, the cells in the webbing die, freeing the individual fingers and toes 1. The protein-an enzyme called caspase-that stimulates this apoptosis is similar in amino acid sequence to the protein encoded by ced-3, and a human protein (bcl- that inhibits apoptosis is similar to ced-9. So humans and nematodes, two creatures separated by more than 600 million years of evolutionary time, have similar genes controlling programmed cell death. Apoptosis plays many other roles in your life. The dead cells that form the outermost layer of your skin and those from the uterine wall that are lost during menstruation have undergone apoptosis. White blood cells live only a few months in the circulation, then undergo apoptosis. In a form of cancer called follicular large-cell lymphoma, these white blood cells do not die, but continue to divide. The reason for this malfunction is a mutation that causes the overexpression of bcl-2, the gene that inhibits cell death.16.5.2 Plants have organ identity genes 304Like animals, plants have organs-for example, leaves and roots. Many plants form flowers, and many flowers are composed of four types of organs: sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels. These organs occur in whorls, which are groups of each organ around a central axis. The whorls develop from groups of cells called meristems in the shape of domes, which develop at growing points on the stem. How is the identity of a particular whorl determined? The answer appears to lie in the activities of a group of genes. These genes have been best described in  Arabidopsis thaliana, also called mouse-ear cress. This plant is very useful for studies of development because of its small size, abundant seed production (over 1,000 per plant), rapid development (from seed to plant to seed in 6 weeks), and small genome (10 chromosomes with 80 million base pairs of DNA). Finally, it is easy to produce mutations in this plant by treating the seeds with mutagens. Normal Arabidopsis flowers have four whorls of organs 11a), but there are mutant strains that have the wrong organs in particular whorls. Such mutations, in which one organ is replaced with another, are called homeotic mutations. Studies on three mutant strains led to a model for the determination of floral organ identity. This model involves three organ identity genes, each of which is expressed in two of the whorls: A Class A gene is expressed in whorls 1 and 2 (which normally form sepals and petals, respectively); A Class B gene is expressed in whorls 2 and 3 (which normally form petals and stamens, respectively); A Class C gene is expressed in whorls 3 and 4 (which normally form stamens and carpels, respectively). Nucleic acid hybridization confirmed these locations for the mRNA transcripts of the three genes. Not surprisingly, these three genes code for transcription factors, which are active as dimers. Possibly, gene regulation in these cases is combinatorial-that is, the composition of the dimer determines which other genes will be activated by the transcription factor. For example, a dimer made up only of transcription factor A would activate transcription of the genes that make sepals; a dimer made up of A and B would result in petals, and so forth. A gene called leafy appears to control the transcription of the ABC genes. Plants with the leafy mutation are just that-they don't make flowers. The protein product of this gene acts as a transcription factor stimulating genes A, B, and C so that they produce the flower.
In addition to being fascinating to biologists, these organ identity genes have caught the eye of horticultural and agricultural scientists. Flowers filled with petals instead of stamens and carpels often have mutations of the C genes. Many of the foods that make up the human diet come from fruits and seeds, such as the grains of wheat, rice, and corn. These fruits and seeds form from the carpels (the female reproductive organs) of the flower. Genetically modifying the number of these organs on a particular plant could increase the amount of grain a crop could produce. Genes homologous to leafy would be useful in this approach because they are probably important in the timing of flower formation, which determines when and where a crop can grow.16.5.3 Plants and animals use positional information 305Certain cells in both plants and animals appear to "know" where they are with respect to the body as a whole. This spatial "sense" is called positional information. In plants, the pattern of development of two major types of conducting tissue suggested to scientists long ago that distance from the body surface may play a role in their formation. Cells destined to become water conductors are farther from the body surface than are those destined to become conductors of sucrose, a product of photosynthesis. Thus those cells destined to become water conductors are exposed to lower concentrations of O2 and higher concentrations of CO2. These differences may help determine which genes are expressed in which parts of the stem and root. Recently it has been suggested that cells on the surface of the stem secrete a protein or other signal that is more concentrated close to the surface than deeper in the stem. Other signals may diffuse from the stem tip and root tip, establishing positional information along the plant's axis. More concrete evidence is available concerning positional information in animals. In the 1960s and 1970s, the English developmental biologist Lewis Wolpert developed a theory of positional information based on morphogens. A morphogen is a substance produced in one location in the developing body that diffuses outward, producing a concentration gradient. As a result, different cells at different distances from the source of the morphogen are exposed to different concentrations of it, and thus develop differently. The wing of a chick develops from a round bud. The cells that become the bones and muscles of the wing must receive positional information. If they do not, the limbs will be totally disorganized: Imagine fingers growing out of your shoulders! Three groups of cells-one at the junction of the bud and the body, a second at the tip of the bud, and a third on the surface of the bud-produce different morphogens that diffuse through the bud. Each cell in the bud receives unique concentrations of each morphogen. The first morphogen determines the proximal-distal ("shoulder to fingertip") axis of the wing, the second determines the anterior-posterior ("thumb to little finger") axis, and the third determines the dorsal-ventral ("palm to knuckles") axis. The signaling pathways involved in limb development have been conserved through animal evolution. Comparative genomic  studies have revealed developmental signaling pathways using homologous morphogen proteins in organisms ranging from nematodes to humans. 16.6 The Role of Differential Gene Expression in Establishing Body Segmentation 305Another experimental subject that developmental biologists have used to study pattern formation is the fruit fly, Drosophila. Insects (and many other animals) develop a highly modular body composed of different types of modules, called segments. Complex interactions of different sets of genes underlie the pattern formation of segmented bodies. Unlike the body segments of segmented worms such as earthworms, the segments of the Drosophila body are clearly different from one another. The adult fly has a head (composed of several fused segments), three different thoracic segments, eight abdominal segments, and a terminal segment at the posterior end. The thirteen seemingly identical segments of the Drosophila larva correspond to these specialized adult segments. Several types of genes are expressed sequentially in the embryo to define these segments. The first step in this process is to establish the polarity of the embryo.16.6.1 Maternal effect genes determine polarity in Drosophila 305In Drosophila eggs and larvae, polarity is based on the distribution of morphogens, of which some are mRNA's and some are proteins. These molecules are products of specific maternal effect genes in the mother and are distributed to the eggs, often in a nonuniform manner. The maternal effect genes are transcribed in the nurse cells, which surround and nurture the developing egg and are localized at certain specific regions of the egg as it forms. Maternal effect genes produce their effects on the embryo regardless of the genotype of the father. Their products determine the dorsal-ventral (back-belly) and anterior-posterior (head-tail) axes of the embryo. The fact that these morphogens specify these axes has been established by the results of experiments in which cytoplasm was transferred from one egg to another. Females homozygous for a particular mutation of the maternal effect gene bicoid produce larvae with no head and no thorax 1. However, if eggs of homozygous bicoid mutant females are inoculated at the anterior end with cytoplasm from the anterior region of a wild-type egg, the treated eggs develop into normal larvae, with heads developing from the part of the egg that receives the wild-type cytoplasm. Conversely, removal of 5 percent or more of the cytoplasm from the anterior of a wild-type egg results in an abnormal larva that looks like a bicoid mutant larva. Another maternal effect gene, nanos, plays a comparable role in the development of the posterior end of the larva. Eggs from homozygous nanos mutant females develop into larvae with missing abdominal segments. Injecting a nanos egg with cytoplasm from the posterior region of a wild-type egg allows normal development. These findings show that, in wild-type larvae, the overall framework of the anterior-posterior axis is laid down by the activity of these two maternal effect genes. After the axes of the embryo are determined, the next step in pattern formation is to determine the larval segments.16.6.2 Segmentation and homeotic genes act after the maternal effect genes 306The number, boundaries, and polarity of the larval segments are determined by proteins encoded by the segmentation genes. These genes are expressed when there are about 6,000 nuclei in the embryo. The nuclei all look the same, but in terms of gene expression, they are not. The maternal effect genes set the segmentation genes in motion. Three classes of segmentation genesact, one after the other, to regulate finer and finer details of the segmentation pattern. First, gap genes organize large areas along the anterior-posterior axis. Mutations in gap genes result in gaps in the body plan-the omission of several larval segments. Second, pair rule genes divide the embryo into units of two segments each. Mutations in pair rule genes result in embryos missing every other segment. Third, segment polarity genes determine the boundaries and anterior-posterior organization of the segments. Mutations in segment polarity genes result in segments in which posterior structures are replaced by reversed (mirror-image) anterior structures. Finally, after the basic pattern of segmentation has been established by the segmentation genes, differences between the segments are mediated by the activities of homeotic genes. These genes are expressed in different combinations along the length of the body and tell each segment what to become. Homeotic genes are analogous to the organ identity genes of plants. To see how the maternal effect, segmentation, and homeotic genes interact, let's watch them "build" a Drosophila larva step by step, beginning with the unfertilized egg.16.6.3 Drosophila development results from a transcriptionally controlled cascade 307One of the most striking and important observations about development in Drosophila-and in other animals-is that it results from a sequence of changes, with each change triggering the next. The sequence, or cascade, is largely controlled at the levels of transcription and translation. In general, unfertilized eggs are storehouses of mRNA's, which are made prior to fertilization to support protein synthesis during the early stages of embryo development. Indeed, early embryos do not carry out transcription. After several cell divisions, mRNA production begins, forming the mRNA's needed for later development. Some of the prefabricated mRNA's in the egg provide positional information. Before the egg is fertilized, mRNA for the Bicoid protein is localized at the end destined to become the anterior end of the fly. After the egg is fertilized and laid, nuclear divisions begin. (In Drosophila, cell divisions do not begin right away; until the thirteenth cell division, the embryo is a single, multinucleated cell called a syncytium.) At this early point, bicoid mRNA is translated, forming Bicoid protein, which diffuses away from the anterior end, establishing a gradient 1. Another morphogen, the Nanos protein, diffuses from the posterior end, forming a gradient in the other direction. Thus, each nucleus in the developing embryo is exposed to a different concentration ratio of Bicoid and Nanos proteins.
The two morphogens regulate the expression of the gap genes, although in different ways. Bicoid protein affects transcription, while Nanos affects translation. The high concentrations of Bicoid protein in the anterior portion of the egg turn on a gap gene called hunchback, while simultaneously turning off another gap gene, KrŸppel. Nanos at the posterior end reduces the translation of hunchback, so a difference in concentration of these two gap gene products at the two ends is established. The proteins encoded by the gap genes control the expression of the pair rule genes. Many pair rule genes in turn encode transcription factors that control the expression of the segment polarity genes, giving rise to a complex, striped pattern 1 that foreshadows the segmented body plan of Drosophila. By this point, each nucleus of the embryois exposed to a distinct set of transcription factors. The segmented body pattern of the larva is established even before any sign of segmentation is visible. When the segments do appear, they are not all identical, because the homeotic genes specify the different structural and functional properties of each segment. Each homeotic gene is expressed over a characteristic portion of the embryo. Let's turn now to the homeotic genes and see how their mutation can alter the course of development.16.6.4 Homeotic mutations produce large-scale effects 307Our present understanding of the genetics of pattern formation began with the discovery of dramatic mutations in Drosophila called homeotic mutations (from the Greek word for "similar"), in which normal body parts are formed in inappropriate segments. Two bizarre examples are the Antennapedia mutation, in which legs grow in the place of antennae 1, and the bithorax mutation, in which an extra pair of wings grows in a thoracic segment. Edward Lewis at the California Institute of Technology found that bithorax was not a single gene, but a cluster of genes, each one determining the functional identity of a segment. Moreover, the genes were lined up along the chromosome in the order of the segments they determined: Genes at the beginning of the cluster determined thoracic segments, then the next genes determined the upper abdomen, and so on. A similar cluster of genes-the ones that are mutated in the Antennapedia flies-was found to determine the identities of the segments at the front of the fly. Lewis predicted that all of these genes might have come from the duplication of a single gene in an ancestral, unsegmented organism. Molecular biologists confirmed Lewis's prediction. Using a nucleic acid hybridization probe  for part of one of the genes of the cluster, several scientists found the probe binding not only to its own gene, but also to adjacent genes in its cluster and to genes in the other homeotic cluster. In other words, there are DNA sequences that are common to all the homeotic genes in both clusters.16.6.5 Homeobox-containing genes encode transcription factors 308The 180-base-pair DNA sequence that is common to the bithorax and Antennapedia gene clusters is called the homeobox. It encodes a 60-amino acid sequence, called the homeodomain, which binds to DNA 1. This sequence turns out to be present in other proteins involved in Drosophila pattern formation, such as bicoid. In all cases, the DNA-binding region of the protein has a helix-turn-helix motif. Each type of homeodomain recognizes a specific DNA sequence in target genes. The bicoid homeodomain, for example, recognizes TCCTAATCCC. What do these proteins do when they recognize their target sequence in DNA? Not surprisingly, they are transcription factors, affecting genes involved in development. For example, Bicoid protein binds to promoters for the gap gene hunchback, activating its transcription. Hunchback protein is also a transcription factor, binding to enhancers and activating genes involved in head and thorax formation. In this way, the homeodomain proteins produce the cascade of events that controls Drosophila development.16.7 Evolution and Development 308Once DNA probes had identified the homeobox sequences involved in fruit fly development, those probes were applied to other organisms. Soon, homeoboxes were found in over a hundred proteins from organisms as diverse as nematodes, frogs, mice, chickens, plants, and humans. As developmental biologists have described more and more intricate developmental systems at the molecular level, they have found that these systems are present in other organisms as well. Comparative genomic studies have shown that, like the genes involved in biochemical pathways, the genes controlling development have much in common among different organisms. There may be only small differences that have turned one species into another, or a fin into a limb. This comparative approach has spawned a new discipline called evolutionary developmental biology, or "evo-devo." homeotic gene clusters. As Lewis had predicted, homeotic genes are involved in many developmental pathways. In the mouse, for example, there are 38 such genes in four clusters, each located on a different chromosome. As in Drosophila, these genes control the development of specific regions of the mouse embryo, and are arranged in the same order on the chromosome as they are expressed, from anterior to posterior, in the developing animal 1. These four clusters are present in all vertebrate animals, and apparently arose from repeated duplications, followed by small mutations, of a single ancestral gene. This gene was recently found in the lancelet, a tiny marine organism thought to be the simplest living member of the chordates, which gave rise to the vertebrates. As we will see in Chapter 24, gene duplication is a common mechanism of evolutionary change. Here, it allowed the formation of gene clusters that could determine increasingly complex organisms.
The eye of an insect is very different in form and function from the eye of a mammal. Yet similar genes are involved in their formation. Mutations of a Drosophila gene called eyeless result in the reduction or absence of eyes in the adult fly. The protein encoded by the wild-type gene is a transcription factor that binds to promoters in over 1,500 different genes involved in eye formation. The homolog of eyeless in vertebrates, Pax6, is also involved in eye formation. In fact, mutations in the human version of Pax6 result in a disease called aniridia, named for the partial or total absence of the iris of the eye. Remarkably, the Pax6 and eyeless genes can be swapped for one another and yet remain functional in the other organism's development. This conservation of a global role for a gene for eye formation suggests that these "general instructions" evolved early and have been used repeatedly as different types of eyes have evolved. In 1822, Geoffrey Saint-Hillaire noticed that in arthropods, such as the lobster, the nerve cord is on the same side as the mouth (ventral), with the circulatory system on the opposite side (dorsal) and the digestive system between the two. This pattern is the inverse of the one in vertebrates, in which the circulatory system is ventral and the nerve cord is dorsal 1. Molecular biologists have now described this "flip" in terms of genes that act during development. The signals for dorsal-ventral determination in arthropods and in vertebrates are the same; it's just that they have opposite meanings! So the protein chordin determines dorsal identity in vertebrates, but its homolog, Sog, specifies the ventral region of arthropods. Likewise, BMP4 is a ventral determiner in vertebrates, but its relative, Dpp, is a dorsal determiner in arthropods. These findings suggest that the difference in body plan between arthropods and vertebrates involved an inversion of the axis of expression of these genes during evolution.17 Recombinant DNA and BiotechnologyAt the beginning of Chapter 3, we introduced you to spider silk, a family of proteins that show a fascinating combination of strength and elasticity. There is great interest in studying this biomaterial, not only to find out how it meets the structural challenges of the spider's web, but also because it has potential uses to humans, ranging from replacing expensive Kevlar in bulletproof vests to use in surgical sutures and even to snag airplanes landing on aircraft carriers. The problem with spider silk is one of supply. "Milking" spiders, as has been done for centuries to get silk for fabrics from moth larvae, does not work on a commercial scale. Becaise silk is made of a protein, one approach to to the mass production of silk has been to use applied biology-biotechnology-to produce silk proteins in quantity and then develop ways to spin them into fibers, just as the spider does in its abdomen. This process has two parts. First, the gene for the silk protein is isolated from the spider genome. Then, the gene is put into a system that can express it in quantity. Silk genes turn out to be similar to the proteins they code for in that they are composed of repetitive domains. Through cutting and splicing of DNA, silk genes have been inserted into bacteria and into yeast, a relatively simple eukaryote. In both cases, an active promoter region was fused to the silk gene so that it would be expressed. Unfortunately, both of these types of host cells for this new DNA-called recombinant DNA-make insoluble silk that remains inside the cells.
Spider silk glands are similar in structure and function to animal mammary glands, in that both of them have epithelial cells that manufacture and secrete water-soluble, complex proteins in large amounts. Exploiting these similarities, scientists at a biotechnology company inserted the spider silk gene, with an accompanying mammary gland promoter for tissue-specific expression, into a goat, which produced abundant (10 g/L), soluble, easily purified silk in its milk. Creating such a transgenic goat is a tricky procedure, so a reliable silk producer goat has now been cloned, using the method described in the previous chapter. The next step, currently under way, is to develop a way to spin this silk protein into fibers. This story-from problem to solution, from protein to expressed gene-has been repeated many times in the past two decades. The products of biotechnology range from life-saving drugs that there is no other way to make in adequate amounts to crop plants with improved agricultural characteristics. Although the basic techniques of DNA manipulation have been called revolutionary, most of them come from the knowledge of DNA transcription and translation that we described in earlier chapters. We begin this chapter with a description of how DNA molecules can be cut into smaller fragments, and the fragments from different sources covalently linked to create recombinant DNA in the test tube. Recombinant (or any other) DNA can be introduced into a suitable prokaryotic or eukaryotic host cell. Sometimes, the purpose of adding new gene(s) to a host cell or organism is to ask an experimental question about the role of the gene that can be answered by placing it in a new environment. In other instances, the purpose is to coax the host cell to make a new gene product. 17.1 Cleaving and Rejoining DNA 311Scientists have long realized that the chemical reactions used in living cells for one purpose may be applied in the laboratory for other, novel purposes. Recombinant DNA technology-the manipulation and combination of DNA molecules from different sources-is based on this realization, and on an understanding of the properties of certain enzymes and of DNA itself. As we saw in previous chapters, the nucleic acid base-pairing rules underlie many fundamental processes of molecular biology. The mechanisms of DNA replication, transcription, and translation rely on complementary base pairing. Similarly, all the key techniques in recombinant DNA technology-sequencing, rejoining, amplifying, and locating DNA fragments-make use of the complementary base pairing of A with T (or U) and of G with C. In this section we will identify some of the numerous naturally occurring enzymes that cleave DNA, help it replicate, and repair it. Many of these enzymes have been isolated and purified, and are now used in the laboratory to manipulate and combine DNA. Then we will see how fragments of DNA can be separated and covalently linked to other fragments.17.1.1 Restriction endonucleases cleave DNA at specific sequences 312All organisms must have mechanisms to deal with their enemies. As we saw in Chapter 13, bacteria are attacked by viruses called bacteriophages that inject their genetic material into the host cell. Some bacteria defend themselves against such invasions by first altering their own DNA and then producing enzymes called restriction endonucleases, which catalyze the cleavage of double-stranded DNA molecules-such as those injected by phages-into smaller, noninfectious fragments. The bonds cut are between the 3? hydroxyl of one nucleotide and the 5? phosphate of the next one. There are many such restriction enzymes, each of which cleaves DNA at a specific site defined by a sequence of bases called a recognition site or restriction site. The DNA of the host cell is not cleaved by its own restriction enzymes, because specific modifying enzymes called methylases add methyl (-CH groups to certain bases at the restriction sites of the host's DNA when it is being replicated. The methylation of the host's bases makes the recognition sequence unrecognizable to the restriction endonuclease. But the unmethylated phage DNA is efficiently recognized and cleaved. A specific sequence of bases defines each recognition site. For example, the enzyme EcoRI (named after its source, a strain of the bacterium E coli) cuts DNA only where it encounters the following paired sequence in the DNA double helix: 5?... GAATTC... 3?, 3?... CTTAAG... 5?.

Notice that this sequence reads the same in the 5?-to-3? direction on both strands. It is palindromic, like the word "mom," in the sense that it is the same in both directions from the 5? end. EcoRI has two identical subunits that cleave the two strands between the G and the A. This recognition sequence occurs on average about once in 4,000 base pairs in a typical prokaryotic genome-or about once per four prokaryotic genes. So EcoRI can chop a large piece of DNA into smaller pieces containing, on average, just a few genes. Using EcoRI in the laboratory to cut small genomes, such as those of viruses that have only a few thousand base pairs, may result in a few fragments. For a huge eukaryotic chromosome with tens of millions of base pairs, the number of fragments will be very large. Of course, "on average" does not mean that the enzyme cuts all stretches of DNA at regular intervals. The EcoRI recognition sequence does not occur even once in the 40,000 base pairs of the genome of a phage called T7-a fact that is crucial to the survival of this virus, since its host is E coli. Fortunately for the E coli that makes EcoRI, the DNA of other phages does contain the recognition sequence. Hundreds of restriction enzymes have been purified from various microorganisms. In the test tube, different restriction enzymes that recognize different recognition sequences can be used to cut the same sample of DNA. Thus, cutting a sample of DNA in many different, specific places is an easy task, and restriction enzymes can be used as "knives" for genetic "surgery."17.1.2 Gel electrophoresis identifies the sizes of DNA fragments 312After a laboratory sample of DNA has been cut with a restriction enzyme, the DNA is in fragments, each of which is bounded at its ends by the recognition sequence. As we noted, these fragments are not all the same size, and this property provides a way to separate them from one another. Separating the fragments is necessary to determine the number and sizes (in base pairs) of fragments produced, or to identify and purify an individual fragment of particular interest. The best way to separate DNA fragments is by gel electrophoresis. Because of its phosphate groups, DNA is negatively charged at neutral pH. A mixture of DNA fragments is placed in a porous gel, and an electric field (with positive and negative ends) is applied across the gel. Because opposite charges attract, the DNA moves toward the positive end of the field. Since the porous gel acts as a sieve, the smaller molecules move faster than the larger ones. After a fixed time, and while all fragments are still on the gel, the electric power is shut off. The separated fragments can then be examined or removed individually. Different samples of fragmented DNA can be analyzed side by side on a gel. DNA fragments of known molecular size are often run in a lane on the gel next to the sample to provide a size reference. The separated DNA fragments can be visualized by staining them with a dye that fluoresces under ultraviolet light. Or a specific DNA sequence can be located by denaturing the DNA in the gel, affixing the denatured DNA to a nylon membrane to make a "blot" of the gel, and exposing the fragments to a single-stranded DNA probe with a sequence complementary to the one that is being sought. The probe can be labeled in some way-for example, with radioactive phosphorus. Therefore, after hybridization, the presence of radioactivity on the membrane indicates that the probe has hybridized to its target at that location. The gel region containing a desired fragment can be removed when the gel is sliced, and then the pure DNA fragment can be removed from the gel.17.1.3 Recombinant DNA can be made in a test tube 313Some restriction enzymes cut the DNA backbone cleanly, cutting both strands exactly opposite one another. Others make two staggered cuts, cutting one strand of the double helix several bases away from where they cut the other. Fragments cut in this manner are particularly useful in biotechnology. EcoRI, for example, cuts DNA within its recognition sequence in a staggered manner. After the two cuts in the opposing strands are made, the strands are held together only by the hydrogen bonding between four base pairs. The hydrogen bonds of these few base pairs are too weak to persist at warm temperatures (above room temperature), so the two strands of DNA separate, or denature. As a result, there are single-stranded "tails" at the location of each cut. These tails are called sticky ends because they have a specific base sequence that can bind by base pairing with complementary sticky ends. If more than one recognition site for a given restriction enzyme is present in a DNA sample, numerous fragments can be made, all with the same sequence at their sticky ends. After a DNA molecule has been cut with a restriction enzyme, the complementary sticky ends can form hydrogen bonds with one another. The original ends may rejoin, or an end may pair with a complementary end from another fragment. Furthermore, because all EcoRI ends are the same, fragments from one source, such as a human, can be joined to fragments from another, such as a bacterium. When the temperature is lowered, the fragments anneal (come together by hydrogen bonding) at random, but these associations are unstable because they are held together by only a few pairs of hydrogen bonds. The associated sticky ends can be permanently united by a second enzyme, DNA ligase, which forms a covalent bond to "seal" each DNA strand. In the cell, this enzyme unites the Okazaki fragments and mends breaks in DNA. Many restriction enzymes do not produce sticky ends. Instead, they cut both DNA strands at the same base pair within the recognition sequence, making "blunt" ends. DNA ligase can also connect blunt-ended fragments, but it does so with reduced efficiency. With these two enzyme tools-restriction endonucleases and DNA ligases-scientists can cut and rejoin different DNA molecules to form recombinant DNA. These simple techniques have revolutionized biological science in the past 25 years. 17.2 Cloning Genes 314The goal of recombinant DNA work is to produce many copies (clones) of a particular gene, either for purposes of analysis or to produce its protein product in quantity. If the DNA is to make its protein, it must be inserted, or transfected, into a host cell. The choice of a host cell-prokaryotic or eukaryotic-is important. Once the host species is selected, the recombinant DNA is brought together with the host cells and, under specific conditions, can enter some of them. Because all the host cells proliferate-not just the few that receive the recombinant DNA-the scientist must be able to determine which cells actually contain the sequence of interest. One common method of identifying cells with recombinant DNA is to tag the inserted sequence with genetic markers, called reporter genes, whose phenotypes are easily observed.17.2.1 Genes can be inserted into prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells 315The initial successes of recombinant DNA technology were achieved using bacteria as hosts. As noted in preceding chapters, bacterial cells are easily grown and manipulated in the laboratory. Much of their molecular biology is known, especially for certain bacteria, such as E coli, and numerous genetic markers can be used to select for cells harboring the recombinant DNA. Bacteria also contain small circular chromosomes called plasmids, which, as we will see, can carry recombinant DNA into the cell. In some important ways, however, bacteria are not ideal organisms for studying and expressing eukaryotic genes. Bacteria lack the splicing machinery to excise introns from the initial RNA transcript of eukaryotic genes. In addition, many eukaryotic proteins are extensively modified after translation by reactions such as glycosylation and phosphorylation. Often these modifications are essential for the activity of the protein. Finally, in some instances, the expression of the new gene in a eukaryote is the point of the experiment. That is, the aim is to produce a transgenic organism, defined as an organism to which a new gene has been added. In these cases, the host for the new DNA may be a mouse, a wheat plant, a yeast, or a human, to name a few examples. Yeasts, such as Saccharomyces, the baker's and brewer's yeasts, are common eukaryotic hosts for recombinant DNA studies. Advantages of using yeasts include rapid cell division (a life cycle completed in 2 to 8 hours), ease of growth in the laboratory, and a relatively small genome size (about 20 million base pairs). The yeast genome is several times larger than that of E coli, yet only 1/300 the size of the mammalian one. Nevertheless, yeast has most of the characteristics of a eukaryote, except for those involved with multicellularity. Plant cells can also be used as hosts, especially if the desired result is a transgenic plant. The property that makes plant cells good hosts is their totipotency-that is, the ability of a differentiated cell to act like a fertilized egg and produce an entire new organism. Isolated plant cells grown in culture can take up recombinant DNA, and by manipulation of the growth medium, these transgenic cells can be induced to form an entire new plant. The transgenic plant can then be reproduced naturally in the field and will carry and express the gene carried on the recombinant DNA.17.2.2 Vectors can carry new DNA into host cells 315In natural environments, DNA released from one bacterium can sometimes be taken up by another bacterium and genetically transform that bacterium, but this is not common. The challenge of inserting new DNA into a cell is not just getting it into the host cell, but getting it to replicate in the host cell as it divides. As you know, DNA polymerase, the enzyme that catalyzes replication, does not bind to just any sequence of DNA to begin the replication. Rather, like any DNA-binding protein, it recognizes a specific sequence, the origin of replication. There are two general ways in which the newly introduced DNA can become part of a replicon, or replication unit. First, it can insert into the host chromosome after entering the cell. Although this insertion is often a random event, it is nevertheless a common method of integrating a new gene into the host cell. Alternatively, the new DNA can enter the host cell as part of a carrier DNA sequence that already has the appropriate origin of replication. This carrier DNA, targeted at the host cell, is called a vector. In addition to its ability to replicate independently in the host cell, a vector must have two other properties: A vector must have a recognition sequence for a restriction enzyme, permitting it to form recombinant DNA.A vector must have a genetic marker that will announce its presence in the host cell. For ease of isolation and manipulation, a vector should also be small in comparison to host chromosomes.
The properties of plasmids make them ideal vectors for the introduction of recombinant DNA into bacteria. Each plasmid is a naturally occurring bacterial chromosome, and has an origin of replication. An E coli plasmid is small, usually 2,000 to 6,000 base pairs, as compared to the main E coli chromosome, which has more than 4 million base pairs. Because it is so small, a plasmid often has only a single site for a given restriction enzyme. This fact is essential because it allows for insertion of new DNA at only that location. When the plasmid is cut with a restriction enzyme, it is transformed into a linear molecule with sticky ends. The sticky ends of another DNA fragment cut with the same restriction enzyme can pair with the sticky ends of the plasmid, resulting in a circular plasmid containing the new DNA. Two other characteristics make plasmids good vectors. First, many plasmids contain genes for enzymes that confer resistance to antibiotics. This characteristic provides a genetic marker for host cells carrying the recombinant plasmid. The second useful property of plasmids is their capacity to replicate independently of the host chromosome. It is not uncommon for a bacterial cell with a single main chromosome to have hundreds of copies of a recombinant plasmid. The plasmids commonly used as vectors in the laboratory have been extensively altered, and most are combinations of genes and other sequences from several sources. Many of these plasmids have a single marker for antibiotic resistance. Constraints on plasmid replication limit the size of the new DNA that can be spliced into a plasmid to about 5,000 base pairs. Although a prokaryotic gene may be this small, 5,000 base pairs is much smaller than most eukaryotic genes, with their introns and extensive flanking sequences. So, a vector that accommodates larger DNA inserts is needed. Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic viruses are often used as vectors for eukaryotic DNA. Bacteriophage lambda, which infects E coli, has a DNA genome of more than 45,000 base pairs. If the genes that cause the host cell to die and lyse-about 20,000 base pairs-are eliminated, the virus can still infect a host cell and inject its DNA. The deleted 20,000 base pairs can be replaced with DNA from another organism, thereby creating recombinant viral DNA. Because viruses infect cells naturally, they offer a great advantage as vectors over plasmids, which often require artificial means to coax them to enter cells. As we will see in Chapter 18, viruses are important vectors for delivering new genes to people in gene therapy.artificial chromosomes as vectors.
Bacterial plasmids are not good vectors for yeast hosts, because prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA sequences use different origins of replication. Thus a recombinant bacterial plasmid will not replicate in yeast. To remedy this problem, scientists have created in the laboratory a "minimalist chromosome" called the yeast artificial chromosome, or YAC. This DNA molecule contains not only the yeast origin of replication, but sequences for the yeast centromere and telomeres as well, making it a true eukaryotic chromosome. YACs also contain artificially synthesized single restriction sites and useful marker genes (for yeast nutritional requirements). YACs are only about 10,000 base pairs in size, but can accommodate 50,000 to 1.5 million base pairs of inserted DNA. There has been considerable progress in creating a human artificial chromosome (HAC), which could someday be usedas a gene therapy vector. Instead of yeast centromere and telomere sequences, their human counterparts have been used. The vector acts as a separate minichromosome in human cells, and can be maintained there for months. An important vector for carrying new DNA into many types of plants is a plasmid that is found in Agrobacterium tumefaciens. This bacterium lives in the soil and causes a plant disease called crown gall, which is characterized by the presence of growths, or tumors, in the plant. A. tumefaciens contains a plasmid called Ti (for tumor-inducing). Part of the Ti plasmid is T DNA, a transposon that produces copies of itself in the chromosomes of infected plant cells. The T DNA has recognition sites for restriction enzymes, and new DNA can be spliced into the T DNA region of the plasmid. When the T DNA is thus replaced, the plasmid no longer produces tumors, but the transposon, with the new DNA, is inserted into the host cell's chromosomes. The plant cell containing this DNA can then be grown in culture or induced to form a new, transgenic, plant.17.2.3 There are many ways to insert recombinant DNA into host cells 316Although some vectors, such as viruses, can enter host cellson their own, most vectors require help to do so. A major barrier to DNA entry is that the exterior surface of the plasma membrane, with its phospholipid heads, is negatively charged, as is DNA. The resulting charge repulsion can be alleviated if the exterior of the cells and the DNA are both neutralized with Ca2+ (calcium) salts. The salts reduce the charge effect, and the plasma membrane becomes permeable to DNA. In this way, almost any cell, prokaryotic or eukaryotic, can take up a DNA molecule from its environment. In plants and fungi, the cell wall must first be removed by hydrolysis with fungal enzymes; the resulting wall-less plant cells are called protoplasts. In addition to this "naked" DNA approach, DNA can be introduced into host cells by a variety of mechanical methods: In electroporation, host cells are exposed to rapid pulses of high-voltage current. This treatment temporarily renders the plasma membrane permeable to DNA in the surrounding medium. In injection, a very fine pipette is used to insert DNA into cells. This method is especially useful on large cells such as eggs. In lipofection, DNA is coated with lipid, which allows it to pass through the plasma membrane. For example, DNA can be encased in liposomes, bubbles of lipid that fuse with the membranes of the host cell. In particle bombardment, tiny high-velocity particles of tungsten or gold are coated with DNA and then shot into host cells. This "gene gun" approach must be undertaken with great care to prevent the cell contents from being damaged.17.2.4 Genetic markers identify host cells that contain recombinant DNA 317Even when a population of host cells is allowed to interact with an appropriate vector, only a small percentage of the cells actually take up the vector. Also, since the process of cutting the vector and inserting the new DNA to make recombinant DNA is far from perfect, only a few of the vectors that have moved into the host cells will actually contain the new DNA sequence. How can we select only the host cells that contain the recombinant DNA? The experiment we are about to describe illustrates an elegant, commonly used approach to this problem. In this example, we use E coli bacteria as hosts and a plasmid vector that carries the genes for resistance to the antibiotics ampicillin and tetracycline. When the plasmid is incubated with the restriction enzyme BamHI, the enzyme encounters its recognition sequence, GGATCC, only once, at a site within the gene for tetracycline resistance. If foreign DNA is inserted into this restriction site, the presence of these "extra" base pairs within the tetracycline resistance gene inactivates it. So plasmids containing the inserted DNA will carry an intact gene for ampicillin resistance, but not an intact gene for tetracycline resistance. This is the key to the selection of host bacteria that contain the recombinant plasmid. The cutting and splicing process results in three types of DNA, all of which can be taken up by the host bacteria: The recombinant plasmid-the one we want-turns out to be the rarest type of DNA. Its uptake confers on host E coli resistance only to ampicillin. More common are bacteria that take up plasmids that have sealed their own ends back together. These plasmids retain intact genes for resistance to both ampicillin and tetracycline. Even more common are bacteria that take up the foreign DNA sequence alone, without the plasmid; since it is not part of a replicon, it does not survive as the bacteria divide. These host cells will remain susceptible to both antibiotics, as will the vast majority (more than 99.9 percent) of cells that take up no DNA at all. So the unique drug resistance phenotype of the cells with recombinant DNA (tetracycline-sensitive and ampicillin-resistant) marks them in a way that can be detected by simply adding ampicillin and/or tetracycline to the medium surrounding the cells.
In addition to genes for antibiotic resistance, several other marker genes are used to detect recombinant DNA in host cells. Scientists have created several artificial vectors in the laboratory that include sites for restriction enzymes within the lac operon. When this gene is inactivated by the insertion of foreign DNA, the vector no longer carries this operon's function into the host cell. Other reporter genes that have been used in vectors include the gene for luciferase, the enzyme that causes fireflies to glow in the dark; this enzyme causes host cells to glow when supplied with its substrate. Green fluorescent protein, which normally occurs in the jellyfish Aequopora victoriana, does not require a substrate to glow, and is now widely used. Many vectors in common use contain only a single marker for antibiotic resistance, outside of the sites for foreign DNA insertion. In this case, the recombinant DNA will have the same antibiotic resistance gene that the nonrecombinant plasmid does. The formation of recombinant DNA in the ligase reaction is favored if there is a high concentration of foreign DNA fragments compared to the cut plasmid. So there will be a preponderance of colonies containing recombinant DNA among those that grow in the presence of the antibiotic. After DNA uptake (or not), host cells are usually first grown on a solid medium. If the concentration of cells dispersed on the solid medium is low, each cell will divide and grow into a distinct colony. The colonies that contain recombinant DNA can be identified and removed from the medium, and then grown in large amounts in liquid culture. A quick examination of a plasmid can confirm whether the plasmids in the cells of the colony actually have the recombinant DNA. The power of bacterial transfection to amplify a gene is indicated by the fact that a 1-liter culture of bacteria harboring the human ?-globin gene in the pBR322 plasmid has as many copies of the gene as the sum total of all the cells in a typical human being. 17.3 Sources of Genes for Cloning 318The genes or DNA fragments used in recombinant DNA work are obtained from three principal sources. One source is random pieces of chromosomes maintained as gene libraries. The second source is complementary DNA, obtained by reverse transcription from specific mRNA's. The third source is DNA synthesized by organic chemists in the laboratory. Specific fragments can be deliberately modified to create mutations or to change a mutant sequence back to the wild type.17.3.1 Gene libraries contain pieces of a genome 318The 23 pairs of human chromosomes can be thought of as a library that contains the entire genome of our species. Each chromosome, or "volume" in the library, contains, on average, 80 million base pairs of DNA, encoding several thousand genes. Such a huge molecule is not very useful for studying genome organization or for isolating a specific gene. To address this problem, researchers can break each chromosome into smaller pieces using restriction enzymes, and then analyze each piece. These smaller fragments still represent a gene library; however, the information is now in many more volumes than 23. Each of the fragments can be inserted into a vector, which can then be taken up by a host bacterial cell. Each host cell colony, then, harbors a single fragment of human DNA. Using plasmids, which are able to insert only a few thousand base pairs of foreign DNA into a bacterium, about a million separate fragments are required to make a library of the human genome. By using phage lambda, which can carry four times as much DNA as a plasmid, the number of volumes is reduced to about 250,000. Although this seems like a large number, a single growth plate can hold up to 80,000 phage colonies, or plaques, and is easily screened for the presence of a particular DNA sequence by denaturing the phage DNA and applying a particular probe for hybridization.17.3.2 A DNA copy of mRNA can be made 319A much smaller DNA library-one that includes only genes transcribed in a particular tissue-can be made from complementary DNA, or cDNA. Recall that most eukaryotic mRNA's have a poly A tail-a string of adenine residues at their 3? end 1. The first step in cDNA production is to extract mRNA from a tissue and allow it to hybridize with a molecule called oligo dT (the "d" indicates deoxyribose), which consists of a string of thymine residues. After the oligo dT hybridizes with the poly A tail of the mRNA, it serves as a primer, and the mRNA as a template, for the enzyme reverse transcriptase, which synthesizes DNA from RNA. In this way, a cDNA strand complementary to the mRNA is formed. A collection of cDNA's from a particular tissue at a particular time in the life cycle of an organism is called a cDNA library. mRNA's do not last long in the cytoplasm and are often present in small amounts, so a cDNA library is a "snapshot" that preserves the transcription pattern of the cell. cDNA libraries have been invaluable in comparisons of gene expression in different tissues at different stages of development. For example, their use has shown that up to one-third of all the genes of an animal are expressed only during prenatal development. Complementary DNA is also a good starting point for the cloning of eukaryotic genes. It is especially useful for genes that are expressed at low levels in only a few cell types.
17.3.3 DNA can be synthesized chemically in the laboratory 319When we know the amino acid sequence of a protein, we can obtain the DNA that codes for it by simply making it in the laboratory, using organic chemistry techniques. DNA synthesis has even been automated, and at many institutions, a special service laboratory can make short to medium-length sequences overnight for any number of investigators. How do we design a synthetic gene? Using the genetic code and the known amino acid sequence, we can figure out the most likely base sequence for the gene. With this sequence as a starting point, we can add other sequences, such as codons for translation initiation and termination and flanking sequences for transcription initiation, termination, and regulation. Of course, these noncoding DNA sequences must be the ones actually recognized by the host cell if the synthetic gene is to be transcribed. It does no good to have a prokaryotic promoter sequence near a gene if that gene is to be inserted into a yeast cell for expression. Codon usage is also important: Many amino acids are encoded by more than one codon, and different organisms stress the use of different synonymous codons.17.3.4 DNA can be mutated in the laboratory 319Mutations that occur in nature have been important in proving cause-and-effect relationships in biology. For example, in Chapter 14, we learned that some people with the disease beta thalassemia have a mutation at the consensus sequence for intron removal and so cannot make proper ?-globin mRNA. This example shows the importance of the consensus sequence. Recombinant DNA technology has allowed us to ask "What if?" questions without having to look for mutations in nature. Because synthetic DNA can be made in any sequence desired, we can manipulate DNA to create specific mutations and then see what happens when the mutant DNA expresses itself in a host cell. Additions, deletions, and base-pair substitutions are all possible with isolated or synthetic DNA. These mutagenesis techniques have allowed scientists to bypass the search for naturally occurring mutant strains, leading to many cause-and-effect proofs. For example, it was proposed that the signal sequence at the beginning of a secreted protein is essential to its passage through the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. So, a gene coding for such a protein, but with the codons for the signal sequence deleted, was made. Sure enough, when this gene was expressed in yeast cells, the protein did not cross the ER membrane. When the signal sequence codons were added to an unrelated gene encoding a soluble cytoplasmic protein, that protein crossed the ER membrane. Mutagenesis has also begun to be useful in the design of specific drugs. The advent of a new branch of biology called computational biology has led to sophisticated studies of the three-dimensional shapes and chemical properties of enzymes, substrates, and their possible regulators. Attempts are being made to devise rules to predict the tertiary structure of a protein from its primary structure. For example, if we know the structure of an enzyme, the three-dimensional design of a polypeptide regulating that enzyme might be proposed. Mutant bacterial strains with genes coding for variants of this polypeptide could be made. Then, the variant polypeptides could be isolated and used to test the relationship between structure and activity. 17.4 Some Additional Tools for DNA Manipulation 320Biological methods are not the only ways of manipulating DNA managed in the laboratory. In Chapter 11, we described DNA sequencing and the polymerase chain reaction, two applications of DNA replication techniques. Here, we examine three additional techniques. One is the use of genetic recombination to create an inactive, or "knocked-out," gene. The second is the use of "DNA chips" to detect the presence of many different sequences simultaneously. The third is the use of antisense RNA to block the translation of specific mRNA's.17.4.1 Genes can be inactivated by homologous recombination 320As we have seen, laboratory-created mutations are an excellent way to ask the "what if" questions about the role of a gene in cell function. Homologous recombination is used to ask these questions at the organism level 1. The aim of this technique is to replace a gene inside a cell with an inactivated form of that gene, and then see what happens when the inactive gene is part of an organism. Such a manipulation is called a knockout experiment. Mice are frequently used in knockout experiments. The mouse gene to be tested is inserted into a plasmid. Restriction enzymes are then used to insert another fragment, containing a genetic marker, in the middle of this gene. The addition of extra DNA to the gene creates havoc with its transcription and translation; a functional mRNA is seldom made from such an interrupted gene. Next, the plasmid is transfected into a mouse embryonic stem cell. Because much of the targeted gene is still present in the plasmid (although in two separated regions), there is DNA sequence recognition between the gene on the plasmid and the homologous gene in the mouse genome. As in prophase I of meiosis, the plasmid and the mouse chromosomes line up, and, sometimes, a genetic exchange occurs in which the plasmid's inactive gene is swapped for the functional gene in the host cell. The genetic marker in the insert is used to identify those stem cells carrying the inactivated gene. The transfected stem cell is now inserted into an early mouse embryo, and through some clever tricks, a knockout mouse carrying the inactivated gene in homozygous form can be produced. The phenotype of the mutant mouse is an indication of the role of the gene in the normal, wild-type animal. The knockout technique has been very important in assessing the roles of genes during development.17.4.2 DNA chips can reveal DNA mutations and RNA expression 321The emerging science of genomics deals with two major quantitative circumstances: First, there are a large number of genes in eukaryotic genomes. Second, the pattern of gene expression in different tissues at different times is quite distinctive. For example, a skin cancer cell at its early stage may have a unique mRNA "fingerprint" that differs from that of both normal skin cells and more advanced skin cancer cells. To find these patterns, scientists could isolate total cell mRNA and test it by hybridization with each gene in the genome, one gene at a time. But it would be far better to do these hybridizations all in one step. For this, one needs some way to arrange all the DNA sequences in a genome in an array on some solid support. DNA chip technology has been developed to provide these large arrays of sequences for hybridization. The chips were developed by modifications of methods that have been used for several decades in the semiconductor industry. You may be familiar with the silicon microchip, in which an array of microscopic electric circuits is etched onto a tiny chip. In the same way, DNA chips are glass slides onto which are attached, in precise order, pre-established sequences of DNA. Typically, the slide is divided into 24 ? 24 ?M squares, each of which contains about 10 million copies of a particular sequence, up to 20 nucleotides long. A computer controls the addition of nucleotides in a predetermined pattern. Up to 60,000 different sequences can be put on a single chip. If cellular mRNA is to be analyzed, it is usually incubated with reverse transcriptase (RT) to make cDNA , and the cDNA is amplified by PCR prior to hybridization. This technique is called "RT-PCR," and it ensures that mRNA sequences present in only a few copies (or in a small sample such as a cancer biopsy) will be numerous enough to form a signal when hybridized. The amplified cDNA's are coupled to a fluorescent dye and then allowed to hybridize with DNA on a chip. Those DNA sequences that form a hybrid can be located by a sensitive scanner. With the number of genes on a chip approaching that of the largest genomes, these chips will result in an information explosion on mRNA transcription patterns in cells in different physiological states. Another use for DNA chips is in detecting genetic variants. Suppose one wants to find out if a particular gene, which is 5,500 base pairs long, has any mutations in a particular individual. One way would be to sequence the entire gene, but this would be difficult to do, and would require a large tissue sample. On the other hand, chip technology can be used to make 20-nucleotide fragments along the gene in every possible mutant sequence. Then, probing with the individual's DNA might reveal a particular mutation if it hybridized to a mutant sequence on the chip. This method may provide a rapid way to detect mutations in people.17.4.3 Antisense RNA and ribozymes can prevent the expression of specific genes 322The base-pairing rules not only can be used to make genes; they can also be employed to stop the translation of mRNA. As is often the case, this technique is an example of scientists imitating nature. In normal cells, a rare method of controlling gene expression is the production of an RNA molecule that is complementary to mRNA. This complementary molecule is called antisense RNA because it binds by base pairing to the "sense" bases on the mRNA that code for a protein. The formation of a double-stranded RNA hybrid prevents tRNA from binding to the mRNA, and the hybrid tends to be broken down rapidly in the cytoplasm. So, although the gene continues to be transcribed, translation does not take place. In the laboratory, after determining the sequence of a gene and its mRNA, scientists can add antisense RNA to a cell to prevent translation of the mRNA 1. The antisense RNA can be added as itself-RNA can be inserted into cells in the same way that DNA is-or it can be made in the cell by transcription from a DNA molecule introduced as a part of a vector. Without this technique, repressing the synthesis of a specific protein would be very difficult. It is especially useful if a tissue-specific promoter is used to prime transcription of the antisense RNA, so that its expression occurs only in a targeted tissue. An even more effective way to ensure that antisense RNA works is to couple the antisense sequence to a special RNA sequence-a ribozyme-that catalyzes the cleavage of its target RNA. Antisense RNA (with or without a ribozyme) has been widely used to test cause-and-effect relationships. For example, when antisense RNA was used to block the synthesis of a protein essential for the growth of cancer cells, the cells reverted to a normal state. 17.5 Biotechnology: Applications of DNA Manipulation 322Biotechnology is the use of microbial, plant, and animal cells to produce materials useful to people. These products include foods, medicines, and chemicals. We have been making some of them for a long time. For example, the use of yeasts to brew beer and wine dates back at least 8,000 years in human history, and the use of bacterial cultures to make cheese and yogurt is a technique many centuries old. For a long time, people were not aware of the cellular bases of these biochemical transformations. About 100 years ago, thanks largely to Pasteur's work, it became clear that specific bacteria, yeasts, and other microbes could be used as biological converters to make certain products. Alexander Fleming's discovery that the mold Penicillium makes the antibiotic penicillin led to the large-scale commercial culture of microbes to produce vast quantities of antibiotics, as well as other useful chemicals. Today, microbes are grown in vast quantities to make much of the industrial-grade alcohol, glycerol, butyric acid, and citric acid that are used by themselves or as starting materials in the manufacture of other products. In the past, the list of such products was limited to those that were naturally made by microbes. The many products that eukaryotes make, such as hormones and certain enzymes, had to be extracted from those complex organisms. Yields were low, and purification was difficult and costly. All this has changed with the advent of gene cloning. The ability to insert almost any gene into bacteria or yeast, along with methods toinduce the gene to make its product, has turned these microbes into versatile factories for important products.17.5.1 Expression vectors can turn cells into protein factories 322If a eukaryotic gene is inserted into a typical plasmid 5a) and cloned into E coli, little, if any, of the product of the gene will be made by the host cell. The reason is that the eukaryotic gene lacks the bacterial promoter for RNA polymerase binding, the terminator for transcription, and a special sequence on mRNA for ribosome binding. All of these are necessary for the gene to be expressed and its products synthesized in the bacterial cell. Expression vectors can be made that have all the characteristics of typical vectors, as well as the extra sequences needed for the foreign gene to be expressed in the host cell. For bacteria, these additional sequences include the bacterial promoter, the transcription terminator, and the sequence for ribosome binding 1. For eukaryotes, expression vectors would include the poly A addition site, transcription factor binding sites, and enhancers. Once these sequences are placed at the appropriate location on the vector, the gene will be expressed in the host cell. An expression vector can be refined in various ways. An inducible promoter, which responds to a specific signal, can be made part of an expression vector. For example, a specific promoter can be used that responds to hormonal stimulation so that the foreign gene can be induced to transcribe its mRNA when the hormone is added. An enhancer that responds to hormonal stimulation might also be added so that transcription and protein production will occur at very high rates-a goal of obvious importance in the manufacture of an industrial product. A tissue-specific promoter, which is expressed only in a certain tissue at a certain time, can be used if localized expression in an organism is desired. For example, many seed proteins are expressed only in the plant embryo. So coupling a gene to a seed-specific promoter will allow the gene to be expressed only as a seed protein. Targeting sequences can be added to the gene in the expression vector so that the protein product is directed to an appropriate destination. For example, in a large vessel containing yeast cells making a protein, it might be useful for the protein to be secreted into the extracellular medium for easier recovery.17.5.2 Medically useful proteins can be made by DNA technology 323Many medically useful products have been made by recombinant DNA technology, and hundreds more are in various stages of development. We will describe three such products to illustrate the techniques that have been used in their development. In most people, when a wound begins bleeding, a blood clot soon forms to stop the flow. Later, as the wound heals, the clot dissolves. How does the blood perform these conflicting functions at the right times? Mammalian blood contains an enzyme called plasmin that catalyzes the dissolution of the clotting proteins. But plasmin is not always active; if it were, a blood clot would dissolve as soon as it formed! Instead, plasmin is "stored" in the blood in an inactive form called plasminogen. The conversion of plasminogen to plasmin is activated by an enzyme appropriately called tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), which is produced by cells lining the blood vessels. Heart attacks and many strokes are caused by blood clots that form in important blood vessels leading to the heart or the brain, respectively. During the 1970s, a bacterial enzyme, streptokinase, was found to stimulate the quick dissolution of clots in some patients with these afflictions. Treating people with this enzyme saved lives, but there were side effects. The drug was a protein foreign to the body, so patients' immune systems reacted against it. More important, the drug sometimes prevented clotting throughout the circulatory system, leading to an almost hemophilia-like condition in somepatients. The discovery of TPA and its isolation from human tissues led to the hope that this enzyme could be used to bind specifically to clots, and that it would not provoke an immune reaction. But the amounts of TPA available from human tissues were tiny, certainly not enough to inject at the site of a clot in a patient in the emergency room.
Recombinant DNA technology solved the problem. TPA mRNA was isolated and used to make a cDNA copy, which was then inserted into an expression vector and introduced into E coli 1. The transfected bacteria made the protein in quantity, and it soon became available commercially. This protein has had considerable success in dissolving blood clots in people undergoing heart attacks and, especially, strokes. Another protein made through recombinant DNA methods and widely used in medicine is erythropoietin (EPO). The kidneys produce this hormone, which travels through the blood to the bone marrow, where it stimulates the division of stem cells to produce red blood cells. People who have suffered kidney failure often require a procedure called kidney dialysis to remove toxins from the blood. However, because dialysis also removes EPO, these patients can become severely anemic (depleted of red blood cells). As with TPA, the amounts of EPO that can be obtained from healthy people to give to people undergoing dialysis are extremely small, but once again, biotechnology has come to the rescue. The gene for EPO was isolated, inserted in an expression vector, and introduced into bacteria. Large amounts of the protein are now produced by bacteria and given to tens of thousands of people undergoing dialysis, with great success at reducing anemia. One of the first important medications made by recombinant DNA methods was human insulin. This hormone, normally made by the pancreas, stimulates cells to take up glucose from the blood. People who have certain forms of diabetes mellitus have a deficiency of pancreatic insulin. Injections of the hormone can compensate for this deficiency. In the past, the injected insulin was obtained from the pancreases of cows and pigs, which caused two problems. First, animal insulin is laborious to purify; second, it is slightly different in its amino acid sequence from human insulin. Some diabetics' immune systems detect these differences and react against the foreign protein. The ideal solution is to use human insulin, but until the advent of recombinant DNA technology, it was available only in minuscule amounts. Since insulin is made up of only 51 amino acids, scientists were able to synthesize a gene for this protein in the laboratory. This gene (there were actually two of them, one for each polypeptide chain of the protein) was inserted into E coli via an expression vector. Production of human insulin by the bacteria made widespread use of the human hormone by diabetics feasible.17.5.3 DNA manipulation is changing agriculture 325The cultivation of plants and husbanding of animals that constitute agriculture give us the world's oldest examples of biotechnology, dating back more than 8,000 years in human history. Over the centuries, people have adapted crops and farm animals to their needs. Through cultivation and breeding (artificial selection), desirable characteristics, such as ease of cooking the seeds or quality of the meat, have been imparted and improved. In addition, people have developed crops with desirable growth characteristics, such as a reliable ripening season and resistance to diseases. Until recently, the most common way to improve crop plants and farm animals was to select and breed varieties with the desired phenotypes that existed in nature through mutational variation. The advent of genetics in the past century was followed by its application to plant and animal breeding. A crop plant or animal with a desirable gene could be identified, and through deliberate crosses, a single gene or, more usually, many genes could be introduced into a widely used variety of that crop. Despite spectacular successes, such as the breeding of "supercrops" of wheat, rice, and corn, such deliberate crossing remains a hit-or-miss affair. Many desirable characteristics are complex in their genetics, and it is hard to predict accurately the results of a cross. Moreover, traditional crop plant breeding takes a long time: Many plants can reproduce only once or twice a year-a far cry from the rapid reproduction of bacteria or fruit flies.
Modern recombinant DNA technology has two advantages over traditional methods of breeding. First, the molecular approach allows a breeder to choose specific genes, making the process more precise and less likely to fail as a result of the incorporation of unforeseen genes. The ability to work with cells in the laboratory and then regenerate a whole plant by cloning makes the process much faster than the years needed for traditional breeding. The second advantage-and it is truly an amazing one-is that these molecular methods allow breeders to introduce any gene from any organism into a plant or animal species. This ability, combined with mutagenesis techniques, expands the range of possible new characteristics to an almost limitless horizon. Biotechnology has found many applications in agriculture, ranging from improving the nutritional properties of crops, to using animals as gene product factories, to using edible crops to make oral vaccines. We will describe a few examples here to demonstrate the approaches that have been used. Humans are not the only species that consumes crop plants. Plants are subject to infections by viruses, bacteria, and fungi, but probably the most important crop pests are herbivorous insects. From the locusts of biblical (and modern) times to the cotton boll weevil, insects have continually eaten the crops people grow. The development of insecticides has improved the situation somewhat, but insecticides have their problems. Most, such as the organophosphates, are relatively nonspecific, killing not only the pests in the field but beneficial insects in the ecosystem as well. Some even have toxic effects on other organisms, including people. What's more, insecticides are applied to the surface of crop plants and tend to be blown away to adjacent areas, where they may have unforeseen effects. Some bacteria have solved their own pest problem by producing proteins that kill insect larvae that eat them. For example, there are dozens of strains of Bacillus thuringiensis, each of which produces a protein toxic to the insect larvae that prey on it. The toxicity of this protein is 80,000 times that of the usual commercial insecticides. When a hapless larva eats the bacteria, the toxin becomes activated, binding specifically to the insect's gut to produce holes. The insect starves to death. Dried preparations of B. thuringiensis have been sold for decades as a safe, biodegradable insecticide. But biodegradation is their limitation, because it means that the dried bacteria must be applied repeatedly during the growing season. A more permanent approach would be to have the crop plants make the toxin themselves. The toxin genes from different strains of B. thuringiensis have been isolated and cloned. They have been extensively modified by the addition of plant promoters and terminators, plant poly A signals, plant codon usage, and plant regulatory elements on DNA. These modified genes have been introduced into plant cells in the laboratory using the Ti plasmid vector 5c), and transgenic plants have been grown and tested for insect resistance in the field. So far, transgenic tomato, corn, potato, and cotton crops have been successfully shown to have considerable resistance to their insect predators.As we described in Chapter 16, the cloning of Dolly the sheep was not done only out of scientific curiosity. One of the main objectives of the biotechnology company associated with this experiment is to make useful products in the milk of transgenic dairy animals. This transgenic strategy is the one that was described in the opening of this chapter for making spider silk. It can also be used to make pharmaceutical products, such as human alpha-1-antitrypsin (?-?AT). This protein inhibits elastase, an enzyme that breaks down connective tissue. Elastase is found in excess on the surfaces of the lungs of people with cystic fibrosis, and is partly responsible for their major breathing problems. Thus, using an inhibitor of elastase could alleviate these symptoms in these patients. The problem is that it has been hard to get enough ?-?AT from human serum. To overcome this problem, the gene for human ?-1AT was introduced into the fertilized eggs of sheep, next to the promoter for lactoglobulin, a protein made in large amounts in milk 1. The resulting transgenic sheep made large amount of ?-1AT in its milk. Since milk is produced in large amounts all year, this natural "bioreactor" produced a large supply of ?-1AT, which was easily purified from the other components of the milk. The production of animals with reliably integrated transgenes is difficult, however, so another approach is to make transgenic clones. In this case, the human gene (with its promoter) is inserted into sheep somatic cells. Those sheep cells that incorporate the transgene can then be used as the donor nucleus source for cloning. This was the motivation behind the creation of Dolly. Goats, sheep, and cows are all being used for what has come to be called "pharming," the production of medically useful products in milk. These products include blood clotting factors for treating hemophilia and antibodies for treating colon cancer.crops that are resistant to herbicides.
Herbivorous insects are not the only threat to agriculture. Weeds may grow in fields and compete with crop plants for water and soil nutrients. Glyphosate (known by the trade name Roundup) is a widely used and effective weed killer, or herbicide. It works only on plants, by inhibiting an enzyme system in the chloroplast that is involved in the synthesis of amino acids. Glyphosate is truly a "miracle herbicide," killing 76 of the world's 78 most prevalent weeds. Unfortunately, it also kills crop plants, so great care must be taken with its use. In fact, it is best used to rid a field of weeds before the crop plant starts to grow. But as any gardener knows, when the crop begins to grow, the weeds reappear. So it would be advantageous if the crop were not affected by the herbicide. Then, the herbicide could be applied to the field at any time, and would kill only the weeds. Fortunately, some soil bacteria have mutated to develop an enzyme that breaks down glyphosate. Scientists have isolated the gene for this enzyme, cloned it, and added plant sequences for transcription, translation, and targeting to the chloroplast. The gene has been inserted into corn, cotton, and soybean plants, making them resistant to glyphosate. In the late 1990s, this technology expanded so rapidly that half of the U.S. crops of these three plants are now transgenic in this way. Humans must eat foods (or supplements) containing an adequate amount of ?-carotene, which the body converts into vitamin A. About 400 million people worldwide suffer from vitamin A deficiency, which makes them susceptible to infections and blindness. One reason is that they eat rice grains, which do not contain ?-carotene, but have only a precursor molecule for it. However, other organisms, such as the bacterium Erwinia and daffodil plants, have enzymes that can convert the precursor into ?-carotene. The genes for this biochemical pathway are present in the bacterial and daffodil genomes, but not in the rice genome. Scientists isolated two of the genes for the ?-carotene pathway from the bacterium and the other two from daffodil plants. They added promoter signals for expression in the developing rice grain, and then added each gene to rice plants by using the vector Agrobacterium tumefaciens. The resulting rice plants produce grains that look yellow because of their high content of ?-carotene 1. About 300 grams of this cooked rice a day can supply all the ?-carotene a person needs. This new transgenic strain is now being crossed with more locally adapted strains, and it is hoped that the diets of millions of people will be improved soon.17.5.4 There is public concern about biotechnology 327When the initial experiments creating recombinant DNA in the laboratory were done in the 1970s, there was considerable concern, especially by the scientists involved, over the safety of recombinant DNA. After all, the bacterium they used, E coli, normally lives in the human intestine. What would happen if the laboratory strain shared its new genes with the bacteria living in humans? In response to this concern, the scientists involved initially stopped their research, took stock of the implications of what they were doing, and then took elaborate safety precautions to prevent accidental release of the recombinant organisms and their genes. For example, the strains of E coli used in the lab have a number of mutations that make their survival in the human intestine impossible. As biotechnology developed, it became apparent that these fears for safety were exaggerated. Accidental release of organisms and transfer of genes has not been a problem. Medical products made by DNA technology are widely used and accepted. However, with the rapid expansion of genetically modified crops, new concerns have been raised. The issue now is a different one in that genetically modified organisms are being designed to be introduced into the natural environment. Indeed, some countries have banned foods that come from genetically modified crops. These concerns are centered on three claims: Genetic manipulation is an unnatural interference with nature; Genetically altered foods are unsafe to eat; Genetically altered plants are dangerous to the environment. Advocates of biotechnology tend to agree with the first claim. However, they point out that all major crops are unnatural in the sense that they come from highly bred plants growing in a manipulated environment (a farmer's field). The new technology just adds another level of sophistication. The concern about safety for humans is countered by the facts that only single genes are added, and that these genes are specific for plant function. For example, the B. thuringiensis toxin produced by transgenic plants does not have any effects on people. However, as plant biotechnology moves from adding genes to improve plant growth to adding genes that affect human nutrition, such concerns will become more pressing. The third concern, about environmental effects, involves the possible "escape" of transgenes from crops to other species. If the gene for herbicide resistance, for example, was inadvertently transferred from a crop to a nearby weed, the latter could thrive in herbicide-treated areas. Or beneficial insects could eat plant materials containing B. thuringiensis toxin and die. Transgenic plants undergo extensive field testing before they are approved for use, but the complexity of the biological world makes it impossible to predict all potential environmental effects of transgenic organisms. Because of the potential benefits of agricultural biotechnology, scientists believe that it is wise to "proceed with caution."17.5.5 DNA fingerprinting uses the polymerase chain reaction 328"Everyone is unique." This old saying applies not only to human behavior, but also to the human genome. Mutations and recombination through sexual reproduction ensure that each member of a species (except identical twins) has a unique DNA sequence. An individual can be definitively characterized ("fingerprinted") by his or her DNA base sequence. The ideal way to distinguish an individual from all the other people on Earth would be to describe his or her entire genomic DNA sequence. But since the human genome contains more than 3 billion nucleotides, this idea is clearly not practical. Instead, scientists have looked for genes that are highly polymorphic-that is, genes that have multiple alleles in the human population and are therefore different in different individuals. One easily analyzed genetic system consists of short moderately repetitive DNA sequences that occur side by side in the chromosomes. These repeat patterns are inherited. For example, an individual might inherit a chromosome 15 with a short sequence repeated six times from her mother, and the same sequence repeated two times from her father. These repeats, called VNTRs (variable number of tandem repeats), are easily detectable if they lie between two recognition sites for a restriction enzyme. If the DNA from this individual is cut with the restriction enzyme, it will form two different-sized fragments: one larger (the one from the mother) and the other smaller (the one from the father). These patterns are easily seen by use of gel electrophoresis. With several different repeated sequences (as many as eight are used, each with numerous alleles) an individual's unique pattern becomes apparent. Typically, these methods require 1 ?g of DNA, or the DNA content of about 100,000 human cells, but this amount is not always available. The power of the polymerase chain reaction 2 permits the DNA from a single cell to be amplified, producing in a few hours the necessary 1 ?g for restriction and gel analysis. DNA fingerprints are used in forensics (crime investigation) to help prove the innocence or guilt of a suspect. For example, in a rape case, DNA can be extracted from dried semen or hair left by the attacker and compared with DNA from a suspect. So far, this method has been used to prove innocence (the DNA patterns are different) more often than guilt (the DNA patterns are the same). It is easy to exclude someone on the basis of these tests, but two people could theoretically have the same patterns, since what is being tested is just a small sample of the genome. Therefore, proving that a suspect is guilty cannot rest on DNA fingerprinting alone.
Two fascinating examples demonstrate the use of DNA fingerprinting in the analysis of historical events. Three hundred years of rule by the Romanov dynasty in Russia ended on July 16, 1918, when Tsar Nicholas II, his wife, and their five children were executed by a firing squad during the Communist revolution. A report that the bodies had been burned to ashes was never questioned until 1989, when a shallow grave with several skeletons was discovered several miles from the presumed execution site. Recent DNA fingerprinting of bone fragments found in this grave indicated that they came from an older man and woman and three female children, who were clearly related to each other 1, and were also related to several living descendants of the Tsar. The other example involves Thomas Jefferson, the third president of the United States. In 1802, Jefferson was accused of fathering a son by his female slave, Sally Hemmings. Jefferson denied this, and his denial was accepted by many historians because of his vocal opposition to mixed-race relationships. But descendants of Hemmings' two oldest sons (the second was named Eston Jefferson) pressed their case. DNA fingerprinting was done using Y chromosome markers from descendants of these two sons as well as the president's paternal uncle (the president had no acknowledged sons). The results have shown that the Thomas Jefferson may have been the father of the second son, but was not the father of the first son. In addition to such highly publicized cases, there are many other applications of PCR-based DNA fingerprinting. In 1992, the California condor was extinct in the wild. There were only 52 California condors on Earth, all cared for by the San Diego and Los Angeles zoos. Scientists made DNA fingerprints of all these birds so that the geneticists at the zoos could select unrelated individuals for mating in order to increase genetic variation and increase the viability of the offspring. A number of these young birds have now been returned to the wild. A similar program is under way for the threatened Gal;agos tortoises. Plant scientists have found in nature or produced by artificial selection thousands of varieties of crops such as rice, wheat, corn, and grapes. The seeds of many of these varieties are kept in cold storage in "seed banks." Samples of these plants are being DNA-fingerprinted to determine which varieties are genetically the same and which are the most diverse, as a guide to future breeding programs. A related use of PCR is in the diagnosis of infections. In this case, the test shows whether the DNA of an infectious agent is present in a blood or tissue sample. A primer strand that matches the pathogen's DNA is added to the sample. If the pathogen is present, its DNA will serve as a template for the primer, and will be amplified. Because so little of the target sequence is needed, and because primers can be made to bind only to a specific viral or bacterial genome, the PCR-based test is extremely sensitive. If an organism is present in small amounts, PCR testing will detect it. Finally, the isolation and characterization of genes for various human diseases, such as sickle-cell anemia and cystic fibrosis, has made PCR-based genetic testing a reality. We will discuss this subject in depth in the next chapter.

18 Molecular Biology and MedicineThe mother brought her two children to Dr. Asbj;n F;ling in 1934 as a last resort. Since their births, she had watched the conditions of her 6-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son deteriorate. Now both were severely mentally retarded. So far, all of the doctors who had examined the children had expressed sympathy but could do nothing. The mother had noticed a peculiar smell clinging to her children, and she had heard that Dr. F;ling was trained as both a chemist and a physician. Could he help? It turned out he couldn't, because their retardation was irreversible. But while examining these children, Dr. F;ling made a major discovery.As part of his examination, Dr. F;ling tested the children's urine by adding a brown solution of ferric chloride to look for ketones, which are often excreted by diabetics. In normal people, this solution stays brown, but in diabetics it turns purple. To his surprise, the urine of these children turned the solution dark green. He had never seen this color before, and it was not described in any of his reference books. At first, he suspected that the children were taking a medication that ended up in the urine and reacted with ferric chloride. So he asked the mother to refrain from giving her children any medications for a week and then to bring him two new urine samples. Once again, the samples turned green. Clearly, a substance unique to the bodies of these two children was responsible for the strange color.
Filing's chemistry training served him well. Using analytic chemistry, he purified the substance from the children's urine and identified it as phenylpyruvic acid. Because of the similarity between this substance and the amino acid phenylalanine, F;ling hypothesized that the children were unable to metabolize phenylalanine, and that the excess was being converted to phenylpyruvic acid. Filing soon found other mentally retarded people who excreted this substance, and among the first ten were three pairs of siblings. The parents of these children were mentally normal and did not excrete phenylpyruvic acid. All of these observations fit the idea of an autosomal recessive inherited condition. Dr. Filing had discovered the genetic disease phenylketonuria. But it was not the first such disease to be described in biochemical terms. In 1909, Dr. Archibald Garrod had found the cause of alkaptonuria-an inherited disorder in which the patient's urine turns black. Garrod coined the term "inborn errors of metabolism" as a general description of diseases in which genetics and biochemistry are clearly linked. Later, the phenotypes of both phenylketonuria and alkaptonuria were identified as abnormalities of specific enzymes in the same biochemical pathway. Today the causes of hundreds of such single-gene, single-enzyme diseases are known. In some cases, these discoveries have led to the design of specific therapies and ways to screen for the abnormal proteins in people who do not overtly show the disease. As we will see in this chapter, more precision in describing these abnormalities at the DNA level has come from molecular biology. Even cancer, it turns out, is caused in most cases by abnormalities in genes. The rise of "molecular medicine" is most dramatically shown by undertakings such as gene therapy and the Human Genome Project, which we will discuss at the end of this chapter. 18.1 Protein as Phenotype 332As we saw in Chapters 11 and 12, genetic mutations are often expressed phenotypically as proteins that differ from the normal wild type. In the first section of this chapter, we identify and discuss the kinds of abnormal proteins that can result from inheritance of an abnormal allele or its origin by mutation. Then we will consider the role of the environment and of patterns of inheritance resulting from autosomal recessives, autosomal dominants, X linkages, and chromosomal abnormalities.18.1.1 Many genetic diseases result from abnormal or missing proteins 332Proteins have many roles in eukaryotic cells, and the genes that code for them can be mutated to cause genetic diseases. Enzymes, receptors, transport proteins, structural proteins, and carriers such as hemoglobin have all been implicated in genetic diseases. Although Dr. F;ling made his discovery in 1934, it was not until 1957 that the complex clinical phenotype of phenylketonuria (PKU) were traced back to its primary phenotype: a single abnormal protein. As F;ling had predicted, phenylalanine hydroxylase, the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of dietary phenylalanine to tyrosine, was not active in patients' livers. Lack of this conversion led to excess phenylalanine in the blood and explained the accumulation of phenylpyruvic acid. Later, the protein sequences of phenylalanine hydroxylase in normal people were compared with those in individuals suffering from PKU. In many cases, the only difference in the 451 amino acids that constitute this long polypeptide chain was that instead of arginine at position 408, many people with PKU have tryptophan. Once again, the principles of one gene ? one polypeptide and one mutation ? one amino acid change hold true in human diseases as they do in studies of so many other organisms. How does the abnormality in PKU lead to its clinical symptoms? Since the pigment melanin is made from tyrosine, which patients cannot synthesize but must obtain in the diet, lighter skin and hair color are observed in people with PKU. The exact cause of the mental retardation in PKU remains elusive, but as we will see later in this chapter, it can be prevented. Hundreds of human genetic diseases that result from enzyme abnormalities have been discovered, many of which lead to mental retardation and premature death. Most of these diseases are rare; PKU, for example, shows up in one newborn infant out of every 12,000. But this is just the tip of the mutational iceberg. Undoubtedly, some mutations result in altered proteins that have no obvious clinical effects. For example, there could be many amino acid changes in phenylalanine hydroxylase that do not affect its catalytic activity.
Analysis of the same protein in different people often shows variations that have no functional significance. In fact, at least 30 percent of all proteins whose sequences are known show detectable amino acid differences among individuals. If one protein variant exists in less than 99 percent of a population (that is, if the protein has another variant at least 1 percent of the time), the protein is said to be polymorphic. The key point is that polymorphism does not necessarily mean disease. The first human genetic disease for which an amino acid abnormality was tracked down as the cause was not PKU. It was the blood disease sickle-cell anemia, which most often afflicts people whose ancestors came from the Tropics or from the Mediterranean. Among African-Americans, about 1 in 655 are homozygous for the sickle allele and have the disease. The abnormal allele produces an abnormal protein that leads to sickled red blood cells 1. These cells tend to block narrow blood capillaries, especially when the oxygen concentration of the blood is low, and the result is tissue damage. Human hemoglobin is a protein with quaternary structure, containing four globin chains-two ? chains and two ? chains-as well as the pigment heme. In sickle-cell anemia, one of the 146 amino acids in the ??globin chain is abnormal: At position 6, the normal glutamic acid has been replaced by valine. This replacement changes the charge of the protein (glutamic acid is negatively charged and valine is neutral; causing the protein to form long aggregates in the red blood cells. The result is anemia, a deficiency of normal red blood cells. Because hemoglobin is easy to isolate and study, its variations in the human population have been extensively documented. Hundreds of single amino acid alterations in ?-globin have been reported. Some of these polymorphisms are even at the same amino acid position. For example, at the same position that is mutated in sickle-cell anemia, the normal glutamic acid may be replaced by lysine, causing hemoglobin C disease. In this case, the anemia is usually not severe. Many alterations of hemoglobin have no effect on the protein's function, and thus no clinical phenotype. This is fortunate, because about 5 percent of all humans are carriers for one of these variants.
Some of the most common human genetic diseases show their primary phenotype as altered membrane proteins. About one person in 500 is born with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), in which levels of cholesterol in the blood are several times higher than normal. The excess cholesterol can accumulate on the inner walls of blood vessels, leading to complete blockage if a blood clot forms. If a blood clot forms in a major vessel serving the heart, the heart becomes starved of oxygen, and a heart attack results. If a blood clot forms in the brain, the result is a stroke. People with FH often die of heart attacks before the age of 45, and in severe cases, before they are 20 years old. Unlike PKU, which is characterized by the inability to convert phenylalanine to tyrosine, the problem in FH is not an inability to convert cholesterol to other products. People with FH have all the machinery needed to metabolize cholesterol. The problem is that they are unable to transport the cholesterol into the liver cells that use it. Cholesterol travels in the bloodstream in protein-containing particles called lipoproteins. One type of lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, carries cholesterol to the liver cells. After binding to a specific receptor on the membrane of a liver cell, the lipoprotein is taken up by endocytosis and delivers its cholesterol to the interior of the cell. People with FH lack a functional version of the receptor protein. Of the 840 amino acids that make up the receptor, often only one is abnormal in FH, but this is enough to change its structure so that it cannot bind to the lipoprotein. Among Caucasians, about one baby in 2,500 is born with cystic fibrosis. The clinical phenotype of this genetic disease is an unusually thick and dry mucus that lines organs such as the tubes that serve the respiratory system. Its dryness prevents cilia on the surfaces of the epithelial cells from working efficiently to clear out the bacteria and fungal spores that we take in with every breath. The results are recurrent and serious infections, as well as liver, pancreatic, and digestive failures. Patients often die in their twenties or thirties. The reason for the thick mucus in patients with cystic fibrosis is a defective version of a membrane protein, the chloride transporter. In normal cells, this membrane channel opens to release Cl- to the outside of an epithelial cell. The imbalance of Cl- ions (more are now on the outside of the cell than on the inside) causes water to leave the cell by osmosis, resulting in a moist mucus outside the cell. A single amino acid change in the transporter renders it nonfunctional, which leads to dry mucus and the consequent clinical problems.
About one boy in 3,000 is born with Duchenne's muscular dystrophy. In this genetic disease, the problem is not an enzyme or receptor, but a protein involved in biological structure. People with this disease show progressively weaker muscles and are wheelchair-bound by their teenage years. Patients usually die in theirtwenties, when the muscles that serve their respiratory system fail. Normal people have a protein in their skeletal muscles called dystrophin, which may bind the major muscle protein actin to the plasma membrane of the muscle cells. Patients with Duchenne's muscular dystrophy do not have a working copy of dystrophin, so their muscles do not work. Coagulation proteins are involved in the clotting of blood at a wound. As we saw in Chapter 17, inactive clotting proteins are always present in the blood, and become active only at a wound. People with the genetic disease hemophilia lack one of the coagulation proteins. Some people with this disease risk death from even minor cuts, since they cannot stop bleeding.18.1.2 Prion diseases are disorders of protein conformation 334Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE's) are degenerative brain diseases that occur in many mammals, including humans. In these diseases, the brain gradually develops holes, leaving it looking like a sponge. Scrapie, a TSE that causes affected sheep and goats to rub the wool off their bodies, has been known for 250 years. In the 1980s a TSE appeared in many cows in Britain, and was traced to the cows eating products from sheep that had scrapie. Then, in the 1990s, some people who had eaten beef from cows with TSE got a human version of the disease, again suggesting that the causative agent could cross species lines. Another instance of humans consuming an infective agent and getting TSE was kuru, a disease resulting in dementia that occurred among the Fore tribe of New Guinea. In the 1950s, it was discovered that people with kuru had consumed the brains of people who had died of it. When this ritual cannibalism stopped, so did the epidemic of kuru. Researchers found that TSE's could be transmitted from one animal to another via brain extracts from a diseased animal. But when Tikva Alper treated these extracts with high doses of ultraviolet light to inactivate nucleic acids, they still caused TSE's. She proposed that the causative agent for TSE's was a protein and not a virus, as had been suspected. Later, Stanley Prusiner purified the protein responsible and showed it to be free of DNA or RNA. He called it a proteinaceous infective particle (prion). Normal brain cells have a membrane protein called PrPc. A protein with the same amino acid sequence is present in TSE-affected brain tissues, but this protein has an altered shape and is called PrPsc. So TSE is not caused by a mutated gene (the primary structures of the two proteins are the same), but is somehow caused by altered protein conformation. The altered three-dimensional structure has profound effects on the protein's function in the cell. Insoluble PrPsc piles up as fibers in brain tissue, causing cell death. How can the exposure of a normal cell to material containing PrPSC result in a TSE? The abnormal PrPSC protein seems to induce a conformational change in the normal PrPC protein so that it too becomes abnormal, just as one rotten apple results in a whole barrel full of rotten apples. Just how the conversion occurs and how it causes TSE are unclear.18.1.3 Most diseases are caused by both heredity and environment 335The human diseases for which clinical phenotypes can be traced to a single altered protein may number in the thousands, and in most cases they are dramatic evidence of the one-gene, one-polypeptide principle. Taken together, these diseases have a frequency of about 1 percent in the total population. Far more common, however, are diseases that are multifactorial; that is, caused by many genes and proteins interacting with the environment. Although we tend to call individuals either normal (wild type) or abnormal (mutant), the sum total of our genes is what determines which of us who eat a high-fat diet will die of a heart attack, or which of us exposed to infectious bacteria will actually come down with a disease. Estimates suggest that up to 60 percent of all people have diseases that are genetically influenced.18.1.4 Human genetic diseases have several patterns of inheritance 335As in any human genetic system, the alleles that cause diseases are inherited as dominants or recessives, and are carried on autosomes or sex chromosomes. In addition, some human diseases are caused by more extensive chromosomal abnormalities. PKU, sickle-cell anemia, and cystic fibrosis are all caused by autosomal recessive mutant alleles. Typically, both parents of an affected person are normal, heterozygous carriers of the abnormal allele. The parents have a 25 percent (one in four) chance of having an affected (homozygous) son ordaughter. Because of this low probability and the fact that many families in Western societies now have fewer than four children, it is unusual for more than one child in a family to have an autosomal recessive disease. In the cells of a person who is homozygous for an autosomal recessive mutant allele,, only the nonfunctional, mutant version of the protein it encodes is made. Thus a biochemical pathway or important cell function is disrupted, and disease results. Not unexpectedly, heterozygotes, with one normal and one mutant allele, often have 50 percent of the normal level of functional protein. For example, people who are heterozygous for the allele for PKU have half the number of active molecules of phenylalanine hydroxylase in their liver cells as individuals who carry two normal alleles for this enzyme. But by one mechanism or another, this 50 percent suffices for relatively normal cellular function. Diseases caused by abnormal autosomal dominant alleles include familial hypercholesterolemia and osteogenesis imperfecta. In these cases, the presence of only one mutant allele is enough to produce the clinicalphenotype. In people who are heterozygous for familial hypercholesterolemia, for example, having half the normal number of functional receptors for low-density lipoprotein on the surface of liver cells is simply not enough to clear cholesterol from the blood. In these diseases, direct transmission from parent to offspring is the rule.Both hemophilia and Duchenne's muscular dystrophy are inherited as X-linked recessives; that is, the mutant alleles responsible are located on the X chromosome. Thus a son who inherits a mutant allele on the X chromosome from his mother will have the disease, because the Y chromosome does not contain a normal allele. However, a daughter who inherits one mutant allele will be a heterozygous carrier, since she has two X chromosomes, and hence two alleles. Because, until recently, few males with these diseases lived to reproduce, the most common pattern of inheritance has been from carrier mother to son, and these diseases are much more common in males than in females. Chromosomal abnormalities also cause human diseases. Such abnormalities include an excess or loss of one or two chromosomes (aneuploidy), loss of a piece of a chromosome (deletion), and transfer of a piece of one chromosome to another chromosome (translocation). About one newborn in 200 is born with a chromosomal abnormality. While some of them are inherited, many are the result of meiotic problems such as nondisjunction. Many zygotes that have abnormal chromosomes do not survive development and are spontaneously aborted. Of the 20 percent of pregnancies that are spontaneously aborted during the first 3 months of human development, an estimated half of them have chromosomal aberrations. For example, more than 90 percent of human zygotes that have only one X chromosome and no Y (Turner syndrome) do not live beyond the fourth month of pregnancy. A common cause of mental retardation is fragile-X syndrome. About one male in 1,500 and one female in 2,000 are affected. Near the tip of the abnormal X chromosome is a constriction that tends to break during preparation for microscopy, giving the name for this syndrome. Although the basic pattern of inheritance is that of an X-linked recessive trait, there are departures from this pattern: Not all people with the fragile-X abnormality, however, are mentally retarded; we will describe the reason for this variation later in the chapter.18.2 Mutations and Human Diseases 336The isolation and description of human mutations has proceeded rapidly since the development of molecular biology techniques. When the primary phenotype was known, as in the case of abnormal hemoglobins, cloning the gene responsible was straightforward, although time-consuming. In othercases, such as Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, a chromosome deletion associated with the disease pointed the way to the missing gene. In still other cases, such as cystic fibrosis, only a subtle molecular marker was available to lead investigators to the gene. In both of the latter examples, the primary phenotype-the defective protein-was unknown; only when the gene was isolated was the protein found. In the discussions that follow, we will examine how mRNA, chromosome deletions, and DNA markers are used to identify both mutant genes and abnormal proteins involved in genetic diseases. We close this discussion by considering the role of triplet repeats in several genetic diseases.18.2.1 The logical way to identify a gene is to start with its protein 336The primary phenotype for sickle-cell anemia was described in the 1950s as a single amino acid change in ?-globin. On the basis of the clinical picture of sickled red blood cells, ?-globin was certainly the right protein to examine. By the 1970s, researchers were able to isolate ?-globin mRNA from immature red blood cells, which transcribe the globins as their major gene product. A cDNA copy of this mRNA was made and used to probe a human DNA library to find the ?-globin gene. DNA sequencing was then used to compare the normal gene with the gene from patients with sickle-cell anemia, and as previously described, a single-gene mutation was found.18.2.2 Chromosome deletions can lead to gene and then protein isolation 336The inheritance pattern of Duchenne's muscular dystrophy is consistent with an X-linked recessive trait. But until the late 1980s, neither the abnormal protein involved nor its gene had been described. This failure was not from lack of effort: Almost every muscle protein that could be isolated had been compared for affected people and those without the disease, and had shown no differences. Then several boys with the disease were found to have a small deletion in their X chromosome. Comparison of the affected chromosomes with normal X chromosomes made possible the isolation of the gene that was missing in the boys.18.2.3 DNA markers can point the way to important genes 337In cases in which no candidate protein or visible chromosome deletion is available to help scientists in isolating a gene responsible for a disease, a technique called positional cloning has been invaluable. To understand this method, imagine an astronaut looking down from space, trying to find her son on a park bench on Chicago's North Shore. Unable to spot the boy with her naked eye, the astronaut picks out landmarks that will lead her to the park. She recognizes the shape of North America, then moves to Lake Michigan, the Sears Tower, and so on. Once she has zeroed in on the North Shore park, she can use advanced optical instruments to find her son. The reference points for positional cloning are genetic markers on the DNA. These markers can be located within protein-coding regions, within introns, or in spacer DNA between genes. The only requirement is that they be polymorphic, with more than one allele. As we described in Chapter 17, restriction enzymes cut DNA molecules at specific recognition sequences. On a particular human chromosome, a given restriction enzyme may make hundreds of cuts, producing many DNA fragments that can be probed using gel electrophoresis. The enzyme EcoRI, for example, cuts DNA at 5??... GAATTC... 3???Suppose this recognition site exists in a stretch of human chromosome 7. The enzyme will cut this stretch once and make two fragments of DNA. Now, suppose in some people this sequence is mutated as follows: 5?... GAGTTC... 3???This sequence will not be recognized by the restriction enzyme; thus it will remain intact and yield one larger fragment of DNA. Such DNA differences are called restriction fragment length polymorphisms, or RFLP's. A RFLP band pattern is inherited in a Mendelian fashion and can be followed through a pedigree. More than 1,000 such markers have been described for the human genome.
Genetic markers such as RFLP's can be used as landmarks to find genes of interest if they, too, are polymorphic. The key to this method is the well-known observation that if two genes are located near each other on the same chromosome, they are usually passed on together from parent to offspring. The same holds true for any pair of genetic markers. So, in order to narrow down the location of a gene, a scientist must find a marker and gene that are always inherited together. To do this, family medical histories are taken and pedigrees are constructed. If the DNA marker and genetic disease are inherited together, then they must be near each other on the chromosome. Unfortunately, "near each other" might be as much as a million base pairs away. Thus, the process of locating the gene is thus similar to the astronaut focusing on Chicago: The first landmarks lead to only an approximate location. How can the gene be isolated? Many sophisticated methods are available for narrowing the search. For example, the neighborhood around the RFLP can be screened for further RFLP's involving other restriction enzymes. With luck, one of them might be linked to the disease-causing gene. Then, DNA fragments from this region can be used to probe for sequences that are expressed and therefore encode proteins. Finally, the candidate gene is sequenced from normal people and from people who have the disease in question. If appropriate mutations are found, the gene of interest has been isolated. The isolation of genes responsible for hereditary diseases has led to spectacular advances in the understanding of human biology. Before the genes, and then the proteins, for Duchenne's muscular dystrophy and for cystic fibrosis were isolated, dystrophin and the chloride transporter had never been described. This identification of mutant genes has opened up new vistas in our understanding of how the human body works.18.2.4 Human gene mutations come in many sizes 338Phenylketonuria and sickle-cell anemia are caused by single base-pair point mutations (Table 18.. As we have seen, some variants of the ?-globin gene cause disease, but others do not. Those single base-pair mutations that alter a protein's function usually affect its three-dimensional structure; for example, such a mutation may alter the shape at the active site of an enzyme. Some mutations lead to not much of a protein at all. For example, some people with cystic fibrosis have a nonsense mutation such that a codon for an amino acid near the beginning of the long chloride transporter protein chain has been changed to a stop codon. Protein translation stops at that point, and a very short peptide is made. As we noted in Chapter 12, other point mutations affect RNA processing, leading to nonfunctional mRNA and no protein synthesis. DNA sequencing has revealed that mutations occur most often at certain base pairs. These "hot spots" are often located where cytosine residues have been methylated to 5-methylcytosine. This phenomenon is a result of the natural instability of the bases in DNA. Either spontaneously, or with chemical prodding, unmethylated cytosine residues can lose their amino group and form uracil. But the cell nucleus has a repair system that recognizes this uracil as being inappropriate for DNA: After all, uracil occurs only in RNA! So, the uracil is removed and replaced with cytosine. The fate of 5-methylcytosine that loses its amino group is rather different, since the result of that loss is thymine, a natural base for DNA. The uracil repair system ignores this thymine. However, since the GC pair is now a mismatched GT pair, a different type of repair system comes in and tries to fix the mismatch. Half the time, the mismatch repair system matches a new C to the G, but the other half of the time, it matches a new A to the T, resulting in a mutation. Larger mutations may involve many base pairs of DNA. For example, some of the deletions in the X chromosome that result in Duchenne's muscular dystrophy cover only part of the dystrophin gene, leading to an incomplete protein and a mild form of the muscle disease. Others cover all of the gene, and thus the protein is missing entirely from muscle, resulting in the severe form of the disease. Still other deletions involve millions of base pairs, and cover not only the dystrophin gene but adjacent genes as well; the result may be several diseases simultaneously.18.2.4 Expanding triplet repeats demonstrate the fragility of some human genes 339About one-fifth of all males that have a fragile-X chromosome are phenotypically normal, as are most of their daughters. But many of those daughters' sons are mentally retarded. In a family in which the fragile-X syndrome appears, later generations tend to show earlier onset and more severe symptoms of the disease. It is almost as if the abnormal allele itself is changing-and getting worse. And that's exactly what is happening. The gene responsible for fragile-X syndrome (FMR contains a repeated triplet, CGG, at a certain point in the 5??untranslated region. In normal people, this triplet is repeated 6 to 54 times (average: 2. In the alleles of mentally retarded people with fragile-X syndrome, the CGG sequence is repeated 200 to 1,300 times. In "premutated" males-those who show no symptoms but have affected offspring-the repeats are fewer-52 to 200 times. These repeats become more numerous as the daughters of these males pass the chromosome on to their children. Expansion to more than 200 repeats leads to increased methylation of cytosines in the CGG units, accompanied by transcriptional inactivation of the FMR1 gene, which somehow causes mental retardation. Expanding triplet repeats have been found in over a dozen other diseases, such as myotonic dystrophy (involving repeated CTG triplets) and Huntington's disease (in which CAG is repeated). Many non-disease-causing genes also appear to have these repeats, which can be found within a protein-coding region or outside of it. Because these repeats are so common, they are assumed to play some important role in the genome. How they expand is not known, but may involve DNA polymerase slipping after copying a repeat and then falling back to copy it again.18.2.5 Genomic imprinting shows that mammals need both a mother and father 339Just after fertilization in a mammalian egg, there are two haploid pronuclei-one from the sperm and the other from the egg-in the zygote. They can be distinguished from each other, and they can be removed with a pipette and placed in other eggs. So it is possible to make mouse zygotes in the laboratory with two male or two female pronuclei. These diploid cells should go on to develop into mice, but they don't. Invariably, if the two sets of chromosomes come from only one sex, development begins but is quickly aborted. The same happens in those rare instances when this occurs in humans; for instance, if two sperm enter an empty egg. Again, a fetus never develops. In addition to showing the obvious need for two sexes, these observations raise the possibility that the male and female genomes are not functionally equivalent. In fact, there are groups of genes that differ in their phenotypic effects depending on which parent they came from. This phenomenon is called genomic imprinting. A dramatic example of genomic imprinting is the inheritance and phenotypic pattern of a certain small deletion on human chromosome 15. If the deletion is on the mother's chromosome 15, the result is a thin child with a wide mouth and prominent jaw (Angelman syndrome). If the deletion is on the father's chromosome 15, the child is short and obese, with small hands and feet (Prader-Willi syndrome). The remaining functional alleles in this region of chromosome 15 must be imprinted in very different ways in the two sexes to result in such different phenotypes. How this happens is not clear.18.3 Detecting Human Genetic Variations 339The determination of the precise molecular phenotypes and genotypes for human genetic diseases has had three consequences: Normal cell physiology has been illuminated by studying mutations. Specific biochemical treatments and, potentially, cures have been suggested. Diagnoses may be possible before symptoms first appear, thus making medical intervention possible. Here we consider the third consequence: the ability to screen for genetic diseases. We will return to the potential for treatments and cures later in the chapter. Genetic screening is the application of a test to identify people who have, are predisposed to, or are carriers of a certain disease. It can be applied at many times of life and used for many purposes. Prenatal testing can identify an embryo or fetus with a disease so that medical intervention can be applied or decisions about continuing the pregnancy can be made. Newborn babies can be tested so that proper medical intervention can be initiated. Asymptomatic people who have a relative with a genetic disease can be tested to determine whether they are carriers. The goal of any screening is not just to provide information; it is to provide information that can be used to reduce an individual's burden resulting from the disease. However, the existence of genetic screening techniques poses ethical questions concerning the uses of this information, as we will see later in the chapter.18.3.1 Screening for abnormal phenotypes can make use of protein expression 340Screening for phenylketonuria in newborns is legally mandatory in many countries, including all of the United States and Canada. Babies who are homozygous for this genetic disease are born with a normal phenotype, because excess phenylalanine in their blood before birth diffuses across the placenta to the mother's circulation. Since the mother is almost always heterozygous, and therefore has adequate phenylalanine hydroxylase activity, her body metabolizes the excess phenylalanine from the fetus. Thus at birth the baby has not yet accumulated abnormal levels of phenylalanine. After birth, however, the situation changes. The baby begins to consume protein-rich food (milk) and to break down some of its own proteins. In the process, phenylalanine enters the blood, and without the mother's phenylalanine hydroxylase to help, accumulates there. After a few days, the phenylalanine level in the baby's blood may be ten times higher than normal. Within days, the developing brain is damaged, and as Dr. Filing saw, untreated children with PKU become profoundly mentally retarded. If PKU is detected early, it can be treated with a special diet low in phenylalanine, and the brain damage avoided. Thus, early detection is imperative. At first, physicians used F;ling's ferric chloride test for phenylpyruvic acid in the urine. Unfortunately, babies with PKU do not start excreting large quantities of this substance until they are 4 to 8 weeks old, which can be too late to prevent brain damage. In 1963, Robert Guthrie described a simple screening test for PKU in newborns that today is used almost universally 1. This elegant application of auxotrophic bacteria can be automated so that a screening laboratory can process many samples in a day.* *Guthrie refused to patent the screening test he developed, or to accept any royalties or payment for it. Its immediate and widespread use was at least in part a result of his generosity in allowing the test to be available to all hospitals at low cost.
If an infant tests positive for PKU in this screening, he or she must be retested using a more accurate chemical assay for phenylalanine. If this test also shows a very high level in the blood, dietary intervention is begun. The whole process-the newborn genetic screen, confirmatory test, diagnosis, and initiation of treatment-must be completed by the end of the second week of life. Since the screening test is inexpensive (about a dollar per test), and since babies with PKU who receive early medical intervention develop practically normally, the benefit of screening is significant. Various other conditions are screened for in newborns. The effects of screening on a target population are seen in the example of Tay-Sachs disease, an autosomal recessive disorder that is lethal in childhood. The missing enzyme can be detected with a simple blood test. Although they do not exhibit any symptoms of the condition, heterozygous carriers of the Tay-Sachs allele are identifiable by their intermediate level of enzyme activity, when compared with that of homozygous wild-type and mutant (affected) persons. If both potential parents know that they carry the mutated allele, the couple can make informed (if difficult) choices about whether to have a child who may be born with a lethal disease. In the United States, Jewish people of eastern European origin (Ashkenazic Jews) have a Tay-Sachs carrier frequency of 1 in 27, much higher than the overall frequency of 1 in 200 in the general population. Since the 1970s, massive publicity campaigns within the Jewish community have led to widespread screening for carriers. As a result, new diagnoses of this disease among Jews have fallen from 65 a year to fewer than 5. In the non-Jewish population, the number of newborns with this disease has remained constant at 15 per year.18.3.2 There are several ways to screen for abnormal genes 341Screening tests based on enzyme activity or protein structure, such as those for PKU and sickle-cell anemia, must be performed on the tissues in which the relevant gene is expressed. For example, the blood level of phenylalanine is an indirect measure of phenylalanine hydroxylase activity in the liver, and hemoglobin electrophoresis shows the presence of sickle ?-globin. But what if blood is difficult to test, as it is in a fetus? What about diseases that are expressed only in the liver or brain and are not reflected in blood? What about proteins whose expression is under cellular control, such that low levels might be the result of a simple dietary factor? Finally, since tissues in heterozygotes often compensate for having just one functional gene by raising the activity of the remaining proteins to near normal levels, how can heterozygotes be identified?These problems are overcome by DNA testing, which is the most accurate way to test for an abnormal gene. With the description of the genetic mutations responsible for human diseases, it has become possible to directly examine any cell in the body at any time during the life span for mutations. However, these methods work best for diseases caused by only one or a few different mutations. If there are dozens of possible mutations of the gene in the population, simple tests such as the ones we will describe are much less informative. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) allows testing of the DNA from even a single cell. Consider, for example, two parents that are both heterozygous for the cystic fibrosis allele, have had a child with the disease, and want a normal child. If the woman is treated with the appropriate hormones, she can be induced to "superovulate," releasing several eggs. One of them can be injected with a single sperm from her husband and the resulting zygote allowed to divide to the 8-celled stage. If one of these cells is removed, it can be tested by PCR for the presence of the cystic fibrosis allele(s). The remaining 7-celled embryo can be implanted in the mother's womb and go on to develop normally. Such pre-implantation screening is unusual. More typical are analyses of fetal cells after implantation in the womb. Fetal cells can be analyzed at about the tenth week of pregnancy (by chorionic villus sampling) or during the thirteenth to seventeenth weeks (by amniocentesis). These two sampling methods are described in Chapter xx. In either case, only a few fetal cells are required.
Newborns can also be screened for genetic mutations. The blood samples used for screening for PKU and other disorders contain enough of the baby's blood cells to permit extraction of the DNA, its amplification by PCR, and testing. Pilot studies are under way for testing for sickle-cell anemia and cystic fibrosis, and other genes will surely follow. DNA testing is also now widely used to test adults for heterozygosity. For example, a sister or female cousin of a boy with Duchenne's muscular dystrophy may want to know if she is a carrier of the X chromosome that contains the dystrophin gene mutation. Similarly, the relatives of children with cystic fibrosis can determine their carrier status via DNA testing. Of the numerous methods of genetic analysis, two are the most widespread. We will describe their use to detect the mutation in the ?-globin gene that results in sickle-cell anemia. There is a difference between the normal and sickle alleles of the ?-globin gene with respect to a restriction enzyme recognition site. Around position 6 in the normal gene is the sequence 5?... CCTGAGGAG... 3?. This sequence is recognized by the restriction enzyme MstII, which cleaves DNA at 5?... CCTNAGG... 3?, where "N" is any base. In the sickle mutation, the DNA sequence is changed to 5?... TGTGGAG... 3?. The single base-pair alteration makes this sequence unrecognizable by MstII. So, when MstII fails to make the cut in the mutant gene, gel electrophoresis detects a larger DNA fragment 1. This analysis is similar to the use of RFLP's. Thus, the method works only if a restriction enzyme exists that can recognize either the sequence at the mutation or the original sequence that is altered by that mutation. The allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization method uses oligonucleotides made in the laboratory that will hybridize either to the denatured normal ?-globin DNA sequence around position 6 or to the sickle mutant sequence. Usually, a probe of at least a dozen bases is needed to form a stable double helix with the target DNA. If the probe is labeled with radioactivity or with a colored or fluorescent substrate, hybridization is readily detected. This method is easier and faster than allele-specific cleavage, and will work no matter what the sequence of the normal or mutant allele. 18.4 Cancer: A Disease of Genetic Changes 342Perhaps no malady affecting people in the industrialized world instills more fear than cancer. One in three Americans will have some form of cancer in their lifetime, and at present, one in four will die of it. With a million new cases and half a million deaths in the United States annually, cancer ranks second only to heart disease as a killer. Cancer was less common a century ago; then, as now in many poor regions of the world, people died of infectious diseases and did not live long enough to get cancer. Cancer tends to be a disease of the later years of life; children are less frequently afflicted. Since the U.S. government declared "war on cancer" in 1970, a tremendous amount of information on cancer cells-their growth and spread and their molecular changes-has been obtained. Perhaps the most remarkable discovery is that cancer is a disease caused primarily by genetic changes. These changes are mostly alterations in the DNA of somatic cells that are propagated by mitosis.18.4.1 Cancer cells differ from their normal counterparts 342Cancer cells differ from the normal cells from which they originate in two major ways. First, a cancer cell loses control over cell division. Most cells in the body divide only if they are exposed to outside influences, such as growth factors and hormones. Cancer cells do not respond to these controls, and instead divide more or less continuously, ultimately forming tumors (large masses of cells). By the time a physician can feel a tumor or see one on an X ray or CAT scan, it already contains millions of cells. Benign tumors resemble the tissue they came from, grow slowly, and remain localized where they develop. A lipoma, for example, is a benign tumor of fat cells that may arise in the armpit and remain there. Benign tumors are usually not a problem, but they must be removed if they impinge on an important organ, such as the brain. Malignant tumors, on the other hand, do not look like their parent tissue at all. A flat, specialized lung epithelial cell in the lung wall may turn into a relatively featureless, round, malignant lung cancer cell. Malignant cells often have irregular structures, such as variable sizes and shapes of nuclei. Many malignant cells express the gene for telomerase and thus do not shorten the ends of their chromosomes after each DNA replication. The second, and most fearsome, characteristic of cancer cells is their ability to invade surrounding tissues and spread to other parts of the body. This spreading of cancer, called metastasis, occurs in several stages. First, the malignant tumor secretes chemical signals that cause blood vessels to grow to the tumor and supply it with oxygen and nutrients. This process is called angiogenesis. Then, the cancer cells extend into the tissue that surrounds them by actively secreting digestive enzymes to disintegrate the surrounding cells and extracellular materials, working their way toward a blood vessel. Finally, some of the cancer cells enter either the bloodstream or the lymphatic system. The journey of malignant cells through these vessels is perilous,and few of them survive-perhaps one in 10,000. When by chance a cancer cell arrives at an organ suitable for its further growth, it expresses cell surface proteins that allow it to bind to and invade the new host tissue. Different forms of cancer affect different parts of the body. About 85 percent of all human tumors are carcinomas-cancers that arise in surface tissues such as the skin and the epithelial cells that line the organs. Lung cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer, and liver cancer are all carcinomas. Sarcomas are cancers of tissues such as bone, blood vessels, and muscle. Leukemias and lymphomas affect the cells that give rise to blood cells.18.4.2 Some cancers are caused by viruses 343Peyton Rous's discovery in 1910 that a sarcoma in chickens is caused by a virus that is transmitted from one bird to another spawned an intensive search for cancer-causing viruses in humans. At least five types of human cancer are probably caused by viruses. Hepatitis B, a liver disease that affects people all over the world, is caused by the hepatitis B virus, which contaminates blood or is carried from mother to child during birth. The viral infection can be long-lasting and may flare up numerous times. This virus is associated with liver cancer, especially in Asia and Africa, where millions of people are infected. But it does not act to cause cancer by itself. Some gene mutations that are necessary for tumor formation occur in the infected cells of Asians and Africans, although apparently not in Europeans and North Americans. An important group of virus-caused cancers in North Americans and Europeans are the various anogenital cancers caused by papillomaviruses. The genital and anal warts that these viruses cause often develop into tumors. These viruses seem to be able to act on their own, not needing mutations in the host tissue for tumors to arise. Sexual transmission of these papillomaviruses is unfortunately widespread.18.4.3 Most cancers are caused by genetic mutations 343Worldwide, no more than 15 percent of all cancers may be caused by viruses. What causes the other 85 percent? Because most cancers develop in older people, it is reasonable to assume that one must live long enough for a series of events tooccur. This assumption turns out to be correct, and the events are genetic mutations. But these are usually not the germ-line mutations found in genetic diseases. Instead, the mutations in cancer cells are usually somatic mutations-alterations in the genes of non-gamete-producing cells. DNA can become damaged in many ways. As we have seen, spontaneous mutations arise because of chemical changes in the nucleotides. In addition, certain substances called carcinogens cause mutations that lead to cancer. Familiar carcinogens include the chemicals that are present in tobacco smoke and meat preservatives, ultraviolet light from the sun, and ionizing radiation from sources of radioactivity. Less familiar, but just as harmful, are thousands of chemicals present naturally in the foods people eat. According to one estimate, these "natural" carcinogens account for well over 80 percent of the human exposure to agents that cause cancer. The common theme in natural and human-made carcinogens is that almost all of them damage DNA, usually by causing changes from one base to another 1. In somatic cells that divide often, such as epithelial and bone marrow cells, there is less time for DNA repair mechanisms to work before replication occurs again. Therefore, such cells are especially susceptible to genetic damage.18.4.4 Two kinds of genes are changed in many cancers 344The changes in the control of cell division that lie at the heart of cancer can be likened to the controls of an automobile. To make a car move, two things must happen: The gas pedal must be pressed, and the brake must be released. In the human genome, some genes act as oncogenes, which act as the "gas pedal" to stimulate cell division, and some as tumor suppressor genes, which "put the brake on" to inhibit it. The first hint that oncogenes (from the Greek onco-, "mass") were necessary for cells to become cancerous came with the identification of virally induced cancers in animals. In many cases, these viruses bring a new gene into their host cells, one that acts to stimulate cell division when it is expressed in the viral genome. It soon became apparent that these viral oncogenes had counterparts in the genomes of the host cells, called proto-oncogenes, that were not actively transcribed. So the search for genes that are damaged by carcinogens quickly zeroed in on the proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are genes that have the capacity to stimulate cell division, but are normally turned "off" in differentiated, nondividing cells. Many are involved in growth factor stimulation. Some remarkable proto-oncogenes control apoptosis (programmed cell death). Activation of these genes by mutation causes them to prevent apoptosis, allowing cells that normally die to continue dividing. Some proto-oncogenes can be activated by point mutations; others by chromosome changes such as translocations; still others by gene amplification. Whatever the mechanism, the result is the same: The proto-oncogene becomes activated, and the "gas pedal" for cell division is pressed.About 10 percent of all cancer is clearly inherited. Often the inherited form of the cancer is clinically similar to the noninherited form that occurs later in life, called the sporadic form. The major differences are that the inherited form strikes a person much earlier in life and usually shows up as multiple tumors. In 1971, Alfred Knudson used these observations to predict that for a tumor to occur, a tumor suppressor gene must be inactivated. But unlike oncogenes, in which one mutated allele is all that is needed for activation, the full inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene requires that both alleles be turned off, which requires two mutational events. It takes a long time for both alleles in a single cell to mutate and cause sporadic cancer. But in inherited cancer, people are born with one mutant allele for the tumor suppressor, and need just one more mutational event for full inactivation of the "brakes" 1. Various tumor suppressor genes have been isolated and confirm Knudson's "two-hit" hypothesis. Some of these genes are involved in inherited forms of rare childhood cancers such as retinoblastoma (a tumor of the eye) and Wilms' tumor of the kidney, as well as in inherited breast and prostate cancers. An inherited form of breast cancer demonstrates the effect of tumor suppressor genes. The 9 percent of women who inherit one mutated copy of the gene BRCA1 have a 60 percent chance of having breast cancer by age 50 and an 82 percent chance of developing it by age 70. The comparable figures for women who inherit two normal copies of the gene are 2 percent and 7 percent, respectively. How do tumor suppressor genes act in the cell? Like the proto-oncogenes, they are normally involved in vital cell functions 1. Some control progress through the cell cycle. The protein encoded by Rb, a gene that was first described for its contribution to retinoblastoma, is active during G1. In the active form, it encodes a protein that binds to and inactivates transcription factors that are necessary for progress to the S phase and the rest of the cell cycle. In nondividing cells, Rb remains active, preventing cell division until the proper growth factor signals are present. When the Rb protein is inactivated by mutation, the cell cycle moves forward independent of growth factors. The protein product of another widespread tumor suppressor gene, p53, also stops cells during G1. It does this by acting as a transcription factor, stimulating the production of (among other things) a protein that blocks the interaction of a cyclin and protein kinase needed for moving the cell cycle beyond G1. This gene is mutated in many types of cancers, including lung cancer and colon cancer.18.4.5 The pathway from normal cell to cancerous cell is complex 345The "gas pedal" and "brake" analogies for oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, respectively, are elegant but simplified. There are many oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, some of which act only in certain cells at certain times. Therefore, a sequence of events must occur before a normal cell becomes malignant. Because colon cancers progress to full malignancy slowly, it is possible to describe the oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes at each stage in great molecular detail. At least three tumor suppressor genes and one oncogene must be mutated in sequence for an epithelial cell in the colon to become metastatic. Although the occurrence of all these events in a single cell might appear unlikely, remember that the colon has millions of cells, that the cells giving rise to epithelial cells are constantly dividing, and that these changes take place over many years of exposure to natural and human-made carcinogens and to spontaneous mutations. The characterization of the molecular changes in tumor cells has opened up the possibility of genetic diagnosis and screening for cancer, as is done for genetic diseases. Many tumors are now commonly diagnosed in part by specific oligonucleotide probes for oncogene and/or tumor suppressor gene alterations. It is also possible to detect early in life whether an individual has inherited a mutated tumor suppressor gene. For example, a person who inherits mutated copies of the tumor suppressor genes involved in colon cancer normally would have a high probability of developing this cancer by age 40. Surgical removal of the colon would prevent this metastatic tumor from arising. 18.5  Treating Genetic Diseases 346Most treatments of genetic diseases try to alleviate the symptoms that affect the patient. But to effectively treat diseases caused by genes-whether they affect all cells, as in inherited disorders such as PKU, or only somatic cells, as in cancer-physicians must be able to diagnose the disease accurately, must know how the disease works at the biochemical level, and must be able to intervene early, before the disease ravages or kills the individual. As we have seen, basic research has provided the knowledge needed for accurate diagnostic tests, as well as a beginning at understanding pathogenesis (the cause of diseases) at the molecular level. Physicians are now applying this knowledge to treat genetic diseases. In this section, we will see that these treatments range from specifically modifying the mutant phenotype to supplying the normal version of a mutant gene.18.5.1 One approach to treatment is to modify the phenotype 346There are three ways to alter the phenotype of a genetic disease so that it no longer harms an individual. Restricting the substrate of a deficient enzyme is the approach taken when a newborn is diagnosed with PKU. In this case, the deficient enzyme is phenylalanine hydroxylase, and the substrate is phenylalanine. The infant's inability to break down the phenylalanine in food leads to a buildup of the substrate, which causes the clinical symptoms. So the infant is immediately put on a special diet that contains only enough phenylalanine for immediate use. Lofenelac, a milk-based product that is low in phenylalanine, is fed to these infants just like formula. Later, certain fruits, vegetables, cereals, and noodles low in phenylalanine can be added to the diet. Meat, fish, eggs, dairy products, and bread, which contain high amounts of phenylalanine, must be avoided, especially during childhood, when brain development is most rapid. The artificial sweetener aspartame must also be avoided, because it is made of two amino acids, one of which is phenylalanine. People with PKU are generally advised to stay on a low-phenylalanine diet for life. Although maintaining these dietary restrictions may be difficult, it is effective. Numerous follow-up studies since newborn screening was initiated have shown that people with PKU who stay on the diet are no different from the rest of the population in terms of mental ability. This is an impressive achievement in public health, given the extent of mental retardation in untreated patients.As we described earlier, people with familial hypercholesterolemia accumulate dangerous levels of cholesterol in their blood. Not only are these people unable to metabolize dietary cholesterol, but they also synthesize a lot of it. One effective treatment for people with this disease is the drug mevinolin, which blocks the patients' own cholesterol synthesis. Patients who receive this drug need only worry about cholesterol in their diet, and not about what their cells are making. Metabolic inhibitors also form the basis of cancer therapy with drugs. The strategy is to kill rapidly dividing cells, since rapid cell division is the hallmark of malignancy. Many drugs have been designed to kill dividing cells 1, but most of these drugs are given in the blood and thus also damage other, noncancerous, dividing cells in the body. Therefore, it is not surprising that people undergoing chemotherapy suffer side effects such as loss of hair (due to damage to the skin epithelium), digestive upsets (gut epithelial cells), and anemia (bone marrow stem cells). The effective dose of these highly toxic drugs for treating the cancer is often just below the dose that would kill the patient, so they must be used with utmost care. Often they can control the spread of cancer, but not cure it. An obvious way to treat a disease phenotype in which a functional protein is missing is to supply the missing protein. This approach is the basis of treatment of hemophilia A, in which the missing blood clotting factor is supplied in pure form. The production of human clotting protein by biotechnology has made it possible for a pure protein to be given instead of crude blood products, which could be contaminated with the AIDS virus or other pathogens. Unfortunately, the phenotypes of many diseases caused by genetic mutations are very complex. Simple interventions, such as some of those we have described, do not work for most such diseases. Indeed, a recent survey showed that current therapies for 351 diseases caused by single-gene mutations improved the patients' life span by only 15 percent.18.5.2 Gene therapy offers the hope of specifictreatments 347Perhaps the most obvious thing to do when a cell lacks a functional allele is to provide one. Such gene therapy approaches are under intensive investigation for diseases ranging from the rare inherited disorders caused by single mutations, to cancer, AIDS, and atherosclerosis. Gene therapy in humans seeks to insert a new gene that will be expressed in the host. Thus, the new DNA is often attached to a promoter that will be active in human cells. Presenting the DNA for cellular uptake follows the methods used in biotechnology: calcium salts, liposomes, and viral vectors are used to get the "good gene" into the human cells. The physicians who are developing this "molecular medicine" are confronted by all the challenges of genetic engineering: effective vectors, efficient uptake, appropriate expression and processing of mRNA and protein, and selection within the body for the cells that contain the recombinant DNA. Which human cells should be the targets of gene therapy? The best approach would be to replace the nonfunctional allele with a functional one in every cell of the body. But vectors to do this are simply not available, and delivery to every cell poses a formidable challenge. Until recently, the major attempts at gene therapy have been ex vivo. That is, physicians have taken cells from the patient's body, added the new gene to the cells in the laboratory, and then returned the cells to the patient in the hope that the correct gene product would be made. A widely publicized example of this approach was the introduction of a functional gene for the enzyme adenosine deaminase into the white blood cells of a girl with a genetic deficiency of this enzyme. Unfortunately, these were mature white blood cells, and although they survived for a time in the girl and made the enzyme, providing some therapeutic benefit, they eventually died, as is the normal fate of such cells. It would be more effective to insert the functional gene into stem cells, the bone marrow cells that constantly divide to produce white blood cells. The use of stem cells is a major thrust of many current clinical experiments on gene therapy. The other approach to gene therapy is to insert the gene directly into cells in the body of the patient. This in vivo approach is being attempted for various types of cancer. For example, lung cancer cells are accessible if the DNA or vector is given as an aerosol through the respiratory system. Vectors carrying functional alleles of the tumor suppressor genes that are mutated in the tumors, as well as vectors expressing antisense RNAs against oncogene mRNAs, have been successfully introduced in this way to patients with lung cancer, with some clinical improvement. Several thousand patients, over half of them with cancer, have undergone gene therapy. Most of these clinical trials have been at a preliminary level, in which people are given the therapy to see whether it has any toxicity, and whether the new gene is actually incorporated into the genome of the patient. More ambitious trials are under way, in which a larger number of patients receive the therapy with the hope that their disease will disappear, or at least improve.18.6 Sequencing the Human Genome  348In 1984, the United States government sponsored a conference to examine the problem of detecting DNA damage in people exposed to low levels of radiation, such as those who had survived the atomic bomb in Japan 39 years earlier. Scientists attending this conference quickly realized that the ability to detect such damage would also be useful in evaluating environmental mutagens. But in order to detect changes in the human genome, scientists first needed to know its normal sequence. In 1986, Renato Dulbecco, who won the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cancer viruses, suggested that determining the sequence of human DNA could also be a boon to cancer research. He proposed that the scientific community be mobilized for the task. The result was the publicly funded Human Genome Project, an international effort. In the 1990s, private industry launched their own sequencing effort. By 2000, "draft" sequences of the human genome were ready. The final sequence is expected to be completed by 2003.18.6.1 There are two approaches to genome sequencing 348Each human chromosome consists of one double-stranded molecule of DNA. Because of their differing sizes, the 46 human chromosomes can be separated from each other and identified 1. So it is possible to carefully isolate the DNA of each chromosome for sequencing. The straightforward approach would be to start at one end and simply sequence the entire 50 million base pairs of the chromosome. Unfortunately, this approach does not work. The DNA of a molecule that is 50 million base pairs long cannot be sequenced all at once; only about 700 base pairs at a time can be sequenced. 21 to  review the DNA sequencing technique.) To sequence the entire genome, chromosomal DNA is first cut into fragments about 500 base pairs long, then each fragment is sequenced. For the human genome, which has about 3 billion base pairs, there are more than 6 million such fragments. The problem then becomes putting these millions of pieces of the jigsaw puzzle back together. This problem can be overcome by breaking up the DNA in several ways into "sub-jigsaws" that overlap, and aligning the overlapping fragments. There are two ways to do this. The publicly funded effort first systematically identified short marker sequences along the chromosomes, so that every small sequenced section of DNA would contain a marker. Then sequences with the common markers could then be aligned 21, left). There are two types of mapped markers along the chromosome: Physical map markers are chromosomal landmarks that can be ordered and the distances between them determined. The result can be compared to a road map showing towns with the mileage separating them. The "towns" are DNA markers, and the "mileage" is in base pairs. Genetic map markers are specific DNA sequences, such as RFLPs or short simple sequence repeats, whose locations are determined genetically. The simplest of the physical map markers are the recognition sites for restriction enzymes. Since there are hundreds of these recognition site-restriction enzyme pairs, there are hundreds of ways to cut the DNA and then generate a restriction map. Restriction mapping has been useful in generating maps for relatively small chromosome regions of thousands of base pairs. Some restriction enzymes recognize 8-12 base pairs in DNA, not just the usual 4-6 base pairs. A DNA molecule with several million base pairs will have relatively few of these larger sites, and thus the enzyme will generate a small number of relatively large fragments. These large fragments can be put into a vector called a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC), which can carry about 250,000 base pairs of inserted DNA in a single copy and cloned in bacteria to create a DNA library. 

The books (fragments) in this library can be arranged in the proper order by using sequence-tagged sites (STSs). These are unique stretches of DNA, 60 to 100 base pairs long, whose sequences are known. About 41,000 STSs have been precisely mapped on human chromosomes, meaning that each is less than 100,000 base pairs (or just a few genes) away from the next STS. To arrange DNA fragments on a map, libraries made from different restriction enzyme cuts are compared. If two large fragments of DNA cut with different enzymes have the same STS, they must overlap. Genetic maps are also useful tools in analyzing the genome. As we described earlier, linkage studies with markers have been very important in tracking down disease-causing genes by positional cloning. The genetic and physical map markers can complement each other-one providing new markers for the other.shotgun sequencing. Instead of the "top-down" approach-getting map makers, then fragmenting the DNA and sequencing it-the "shotgun" approach cuts the DNA at random into small, sequence-ready fragments and lets powerful computers determine markers that overlap 21, right). The fragments can then be aligned. The shotgun method, which has been used by private industry, is much faster than the hierarchical approach because there is no need for physical or genetic maps. At first there was considerable skepticism about the method. There were concerns that without rigorous prior mapping of marker sites on the chromosomes, the computer might pick out repetitive sequences common to many DNA fragments and line the fragments up incorrectly. But the rapid rate of development of sophisticated computer and software power has allowed the technique to quickly be refined to a point where inaccurate alignment is not a major problem. The entire 180 million-base-pair fruit fly genome was sequenced by the shotgun method in little over a year. This proved that the rapid method might work for the much larger human genome, and in fact it did.18.6.2 The human genome project is more than just a sequence 350Reading the human "book of life" is an achievement that ranks with other recent great events in exploration, such as landing on the moon. But gene sequencing, and the tools developed to carry it out, are changing biology in many other ways as well. The sequences of other organisms have provided insights and practical information on both prokaryotic (Chapter 1 and eukaryotic (Chapter 1 genomes. Many genes sequenced and identified in "simpler" organisms have counterparts in humans, so these findings have facilitated the identification of human genes. mapping technology has made the isolation of human genes by positional cloning much easier, because of the many chromosome markers available. Over 100 disease-related genes have been identified in this way. Genetic variability in drug metabolism has been a medical problem for a long time. The identification of the genes responsible is leading to tests that predict who will react best to which medications. This is the emerging science of pharmacogenomics. DNA chips 1 are being used to analyze the specific expression of thousands of genes in cells in different biochemical states. For example, a Cancer Genome Anatomy Project seeks to make an mRNA "fingerprint" of a tumor at each stage of its development. Finding out which sequences are expressed at what stage will be important not only in diagnosis, but also to identify targets for gene therapy. The Human Genome Diversity Project is looking for important polymorphisms in specific human populations. For example, the Pima Indians in Arizona have a high frequency of extreme obesity and diabetes. A search of their genomes might reveal genes predisposing them to these diseases. The end result of all of this knowledge of the human genome may lead to a new approach to medical care, in which each person's genes will be used to prescribe lifestyles and treatments that can maximize that person's genetic potential.18.6.3 How should genetic information be used? 350After the primary genetic defect that causes cystic fibrosis was discovered, many people predicted a "tidal wave" of genetic testing for heterozygous carriers. Everyone would want the test, it was thought-especially the relatives of patients with the genetic disease. But the tidal wave has not developed. To find out why, a team of psychologists, ethicists, and geneticists interviewed 20,000 people in the United States. What the researchers found surprised them: Most people are simply not very interested in their genetic makeup, unless they have a close relative with a genetic disease and are involved in a decision about pregnancy. There are other people, however, who might be very interested in the results of genetic testing. People who test positive for genetic abnormalities, from hypercholesterolemia to cancer, might be denied employment or health insurance. The many linkages of genetic abnormalities to behavioral characteristics, such as manic depression and schizophrenia, has led to the potential for screening and then social manipulations of those at risk. Consequently, many legislative bodies are considering and passing bills that prohibit genetic discrimination. The Human Genome Diversity Project has raised many concerns about exploitation and commercialization of people's DNA sequences. Is a gene that confers resistance to cancer, for example, the property of an individual, an ethnic group in which it may be frequent, a pharmaceutical company that finds it, or humanity at large? This issue of ownership is being tested worldwide, perhaps no more acutely than in Iceland, most of whose 270,000 people trace their ancestry back to the first settlers that arrived on the island 1,000 years ago. Issues from the entire population have been sampled and stored for several generations. This tissue bank is a potential gold mine for genetic prospectors, and a single company has been set up, with government support, to sell the knowledge that comes out of analyzing the DNA's of Iceland's people.19 Natural Defenses against DiseaseOn January 6, 1777, George Washington, commanding the Revolutionary army of the fledgling United States, made a fateful medical/military decision. As he wrote to his chief physician, "Finding smallpox to be spreading much, and fearing that no precaution can prevent it from running through the whole of our army, I have determined that the troops shall be inoculated. Should the disease rage with its usual virulence, we should have more to dread from it than the sword of the enemy." Washington was speaking from experience. He himself had survived the disease in 1751. During 1776 his army lost 1,000 men in battle, but 10,000 to smallpox. This highly virulent disease, which killed up to 1 in 4 people who were exposed to it, had already figured prominently in American history. A century before, it had decimated the Native Americans, making colonization by Europeans easier. Two years previously at Quebec, it had laid waste an American army that was trying to annex Canada by force. The death rate due to smallpox in the Revolutionary army plummeted after Washington's order was carried out. How did inoculation, a practice that was learned from the people in the Near East and from African slaves, save the soldiers? And why was Washington himself immune to the disease as it ravaged his army? The answers to these questions lie in the cells and molecules of the immune system. When Washington caught smallpox as a teenager, cells called macrophages engulfed some of the smallpox viruses by phagocytosis and partly digested them. The macrophages displayed fragments of the viruses on their cell surfaces. Specialized white blood cells called T cells recognized those fragments and were activated to divide and differentiate further. The descendants of these activated T cells then attacked Washington's virus-infected cells, preventing the lethal spread of the virus. Other descendants of the T cells persisted in his body as "memory cells," and rapidly defended him when he was exposed to the disease as an adult. Inoculation of his soldiers with powdered scabs containing dead viruses from smallpox patients stimulated the formation of these memory cells in their bodies, once again preventing the virus from spreading following infection. This practice had been used for centuries, and was finally put on a more scientific basis by Edward Jenner two decades after Washington's army was inoculated.
These defensive events in the bodies of Washington and his soldiers required the participation of many kinds of proteins. Some cellular proteins functioned as specific receptors, such as the markers identifying Washington's cells, some as signals triggering events in the macrophages and T cells, and others as weapons leading to the breakdown of infected cells. Animal defense systems are based on the distinction between self -the animal's own molecules-and nonself, or foreign, molecules. In this chapter we consider the mechanisms by which animals recognize nonself molecules and combat infection and disease. Many of these mechanisms are based on the principles of genetics and molecular biology that have been discussed in earlier chapters. In general, there are two types of defenses. Innate, or nonspecific, defenses are general mechanisms that protect the body from many pathogens. An example is the skin, which acts as a barrier to stop potentially invading viruses from entering the body. Most animals and plants have innate defenses. Specific defenses are aimed at a single target. For example, an antibody protein can be made that binds to a virus if that virus ever enters the bloodstream, and this binding results in the virus being destroyed. Specific defense mechanisms are present in vertebrate animals. In animals that have both, innate and specific defenses operate together and offer a coordinated defense. 19.1 Defensive Cells and Proteins 354The components of the defense system are dispersed throughout the body and interact with almost all of its other tissues and organs. The lymphoid tissues, which include the thymus, bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes, are essential parts of our defense system , but central to their functioning are the blood and lymph. Blood and lymph are fluid tissues that consist of water, dissolved solutes, and cells. Blood plasma is a yellowish solution containing ions, small molecular solutes, and soluble proteins.  Suspended in the plasma are red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets (cell fragments essential to clotting). While red blood cells are normally confined to the closed circulatory system, consisting of the heart, arteries, capillaries, and veins, white blood cells and platelets are also found in the lymph. The lymph is a fluid that is derived from blood and other tissues. It accumulates in spaces outside the blood vessels of the circulatory system and contains many of the components of blood, but not red blood cells. From the spaces around body cells, the lymph moves slowly into the lymphatic system. Tiny lymph capillaries conduct fluid to larger vessels that join together, forming one large lymph duct that joins a major vein (the superior vena cava) near the heart. By this system of vessels, the lymphatic fluid is eventually returned to the blood and the circulatory system. At many sites along the network of lymph vessels are small roundish structures called lymph nodes, which contain a variety of white blood cells involved in both innate and specific defenses. As fluid passes through the node, it is filtered and "inspected" for foreign materials by the defensive cells.19.1.1 White blood cells play many defensive roles 354One milliliter of blood typically contains about 5 billion red blood cells and 7 million of the larger white blood cells. White blood cells have nuclei and are colorless, whereas mammalian red blood cells lose their nuclei during development. White blood cells can leave the circulatory system and enter extracellular spaces where foreign cells or substances are present. In response to invading pathogens, the number of white blood cells in the blood and lymph may rise sharply, providing medical professionals with a useful clue for detecting an infection. Several types of white blood cells are important in the body's defenses. But they are all members of two broad groups, phagocytes and lymphocytes. Phagocytes engulf and digest nonself materials. The most important phagocytes are the neutrophils and the macrophages. In addition to phagocytosis of nonself materials, macrophages have the important additional function of presenting partly digested nonself materials to the T cells. Lymphocytes are the most abundant white cells. A healthy person has about a trillion lymphocytes, making them as numerous as brain cells. There are two types of lymphocytes, B cells and T cells. Both originate from cells in the bone marrow. Immature T cells migrate via the blood to the thymus, where they mature. They participate in specific defenses against foreign or altered cells, such as virus-infected cells and tumor cells. The B cells leave the bone marrow and circulate through the blood and lymph vessels. B cells make specialized proteins called antibodies that enter the blood and bind to nonself substances.19.1.2 Immune system proteins bind pathogens or signal other cells 354The various kinds of cells that defend our bodies work together like cast members in a drama, interacting with one another and with the cells of invading pathogens. These cell-cell interactions are accomplished by a variety of key proteins, including receptors, surface markers, signaling molecules, and toxins. They will be discussed later in the chapter, as they appear in the context of our story. However, let's take a brief look at four of the major players here, to help set the scene. antibodies are proteins that bind specifically to certain substances identified by the immune system as nonself or altered self.  B cells secrete antibodies as defensive weapons. T cell receptors are proteins on the surfaces of T cells. They recognize and bind to nonself substances on the surfaces of other cells. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins protrude from the surfaces of most cells in the mammalian body. They are important "self"-identifying labels and play major parts in coordinating interactions among lymphocytes and macrophages. cytokines are soluble signal proteins released by T cells, macrophages, and other cells. They bind to and alter the behavior of their target cells. Different cytokines activate or inactivate B cells, macrophages, and T cells. Some cytokines limit tumor growth by killing tumor cells. 19.2 Innate Defenses 355Innate defenses are general protection mechanisms to stop pathogens-harmful organisms that can cause disease-from invading the body. In humans, these defenses include physical barriers as well as cellular and chemical defenses.Table 19.1 provides a summary of the innate defense mechanisms.19.2.1 Barriers and local agents defend the body against invaders 356Skin is a primary innate defense against invasion. Fungi, bacteria, and viruses rarely penetrate healthy, unbroken skin. But damaged skin or internal surface tissue greatly increases the risk of infection by pathogenic agents. The bacteria and fungi that normally live and reproduce in great numbers on our body surfaces without causing disease are referred to as normal flora. These natural occupants of our bodies compete with pathogens for space and nutrients, so normal flora are a form of innate defense. The mucus-secreting tissues found in parts of the visual, respiratory, digestive, excretory, and reproductive systems have other defenses against pathogens. Tears, nasal mucus, and saliva possess an enzyme called lysozyme that attacks the cell walls of many bacteria. Mucus in the nose traps airborne microorganisms, and most of those that get past this filter end up trapped in mucus deeper in the respiratory tract. Mucus and trapped pathogens are removed by the beating of cilia in the respiratory passageway, which moves a sheet of mucus and the debris it contains up toward the nose and mouth. Sneezing is another way to remove microorganisms from the respiratory tract. Pathogens that reach the digestive tract (stomach, small intestine, and large intestine) are met by other defenses. The stomach is a deadly environment for many bacteria because of the hydrochloric acid and protein-digesting enzymes that are secreted into it. The intact lining of the small intestine is not normally penetrated by bacteria, and some pathogens are killed by bile salts secreted into this part of the tract. The large intestine harbors many bacteria, which multiply freely; however, these are usually removed quickly with the feces. Most of the bacteria in the large intestine are normal flora that provide benefits to their host. All of these barriers and secretions are nonspecific defenses because they act on all invading pathogens in the same way. But there are more complicated nonspecific cellular chemical defenses.19.2.2 Innate defenses include chemical and cellular processes 356Pathogens that manage to penetrate the body's outer and inner surfaces encounter additional nonspecific defenses. These defenses include the secretion of various defensive proteins as well as cellular defenses involving phagocytosis. Vertebrate blood contains about 20 different antimicrobial proteins that make up the complement system. These proteins, in different combinations, provide three types of defenses. In each type, the complement proteins act in a characteristic sequence, or cascade, with each protein activating the next. Complement proteins attach to microbes, which helps phagocytes destroy them. Complement proteins activate the inflammatory response and attract phagocytes to sites of infection. Complement proteins, acting with antibodies, lyse (burst) invading cells such as bacteria. When cells are infected by a virus, they produce small amounts of antimicrobial proteins called interferons that increase the resistance of neighboring cells to infection by the same or other viruses. Interferons have been found in many vertebrates and are one of the body's lines of nonspecific defense against viral infection. Interferons differ from species to species, and each vertebrate species produces at least three different interferons. All interferons are glycoproteins (proteins with a carbohydrate component) consisting of about 160 amino acids. By binding to receptors in the plasma membranes of their target cells, interferons inhibit viral replication. Phagocytes provide an important nonspecific defense against pathogens that penetrate the surface of the host. Some phagocytes travel freely in the circulatory system; others can move out of blood vessels and adhere to certain tissues. Pathogens such as large molecules, cells, and viruses become attached to the membrane of a phagocyte , which ingests them by endocytosis. After lysosomes fuse with the phagosome, the pathogens are degraded by lysosomal enzymes. There are three types of phagocytes: Neutrophils are the most abundant phagocytes, but they are relatively short-lived. They recognize and attack pathogens in infected tissue.
Monocytes mature into macrophages, which live longer than neutrophils and can consume large numbers of pathogens. Some macrophages roam through the body; others reside permanently in lymph nodes, the spleen, and certain other lymphoid tissues, "inspecting" the lymph for pathogens. eosinophils are weakly phagocytic. Their primary function is to kill parasites, such as worms, that have been coated by antibodies. A class of nonphagocytic white blood cells, known as natural killer cells, can distinguish virus-infected cells and some tumor cells from their normal counterpartsand initiate the lysis of these target cells. In addition to this nonspecific action, natural killer cells are part of the specific defenses, as we will describe later in this chapter. Another important innate defense is inflammation. The body employs this characteristic response in dealing with infection or with any other process that causes tissue injury either on the surface of the body or internally. You have experienced the symptoms of inflammation: redness and swelling, accompanied by heat and pain. The damaged body cells cause the inflammation by releasing various substances, such as the chemical signal histamine. Cells adhering to the skin and linings of organs, called mast cells, contain histamine and release it when they are damaged, as do certain white blood cells called basophils. The redness and heat of inflammation result from histamine-induced dilation of blood vessels in the infected or injured area. Histamine also causes the capillaries (the smallest blood vessels) to become leaky, allowing blood plasma and phagocytes to escape into the tissue, causing the characteristic swelling. The pain of inflammation results from increased pressure (from the swelling) and from the action of leaked enzymes. In damaged or infected tissue, complement proteins and other chemical signals attract phagocytes-neutrophils first, and then monocytes, which become macrophages. The macrophages engulf the invaders and debris, and are responsible for most of the healing associated with inflammation. They produce several cytokines, which, among other things, signal the brain to produce a fever, which inhibits the growth of the invading pathogen. Cytokines may also attract phagocytic cells to the site of injury and initiates a specific immune response to the pathogen. Following inflammation, pus may accumulate. It is composed of dead cells (neutrophils and the damaged body cells) and leaked fluid. A normal result of inflammation, pus is gradually consumed and digested by macrophages. 19.3 Specific Defenses: The Immune Response 358Nonspecific defenses are numerous and effective, but some invaders elude them and must be dealt with by defenses targeted against specific threats. The recognition and destruction of specific nonself substances is an important function of an animal's immune system.19.3.1 Four features characterize the immune response 358The characteristic features of the immune system are specificity, the ability to respond to an enormous diversity of foreign molecules and organisms, the ability to distinguish self from nonself, and immunological memory. Antigens are organisms or molecules that are recognized by and/or interact with the immune system to initiate an immune response. The specific sites on antigens that the immune system recognizes are called antigenic determinants. Chemically, an antigenic determinant is a specific portion of a large molecule, such as a sequence of amino acids that may be present in several proteins. A large antigen, such as a whole cell, may have many different antigenic determinants on its surface, each capable of being bound by a specific antibody or T cell. Even a single protein has multiple, different antigenic determinants. The host responds to the presence of an antigen by producing highly specific defenses-T cells or antibodies that correspond to the antigenic determinants of the antigen. Each T cell and each antibody is specific for a single antigenic determinant. Challenges to the immune system are legion: individual molecules, viruses, bacteria, protists, and multicellular parasites. Each of these types of potential pathogens includes many species; each species includes many subtly differing genetic strains; each strain possesses multiple surface features, each of which is presented to the immune system. Estimates vary, but a reasonable guess is that humans can respond specifically to 10 million different antigenic determinants. Upon recognition of an antigenic determinant, the immune system responds by activating lymphocytes of the appropriate specificity. The human body contains tens of thousands of different proteins, each with a specific three-dimensional structure capable of generating an immune response. Every cell in the body bears a tremendous number of antigenic determinants. A crucial attribute of an individual's immune system is that it recognizes the body's own antigenic determinants and does not attack them. Failure to make this distinction may lead to an autoimmune disease-an attack on one's own body. Such diseases include rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. After responding to a particular type of pathogen once, the immune system "remembers" that pathogen and can usually respond more rapidly and powerfully to the same threat in the future. This immunological memory usually saves us from repeats of childhood diseases such as chicken pox. Vaccination and inoculation against disease work because the immune system "remembers" the antigenic determinants that are inoculated into the body.19.3.2 There are two interactive immune responses 359The immune system has two responses against invaders: the humoral immune response and the cellular immune response. The two responses operate in concert-simultaneously and cooperatively, sharing mechanisms. In the humoral immune response (from the Latin humor, "fluid"), antibodies react with antigenic determinants on foreign invaders in blood, lymph, and tissue fluids. An animal produces a vast diversity of antibodies that, among them, can react with almost any conceivable antigen encountered. Some antibodies are soluble and travel free in the blood and lymph; others exist as integral membrane proteins on specialized lymphocytes called B cells. The first time a specific antigen invades the body, it may be detected by and bind to a B cell whose membrane antibody recognizes one of its antegenic determinants. This activated B cell forms a plasma cell that produces makes multiple soluble copies of antibody with the same specificity as the membrane antibody. The cellular immune response is directed against an antigen that has become established within a cell of the host animal. It detects and destroys virus-infected or mutated cells. Unlike the humoral response, the cellular immune response does not use antibodies. Instead, it is carried out by T cells within the lymph nodes, the bloodstream, and the intercellular spaces. The T cells have integral membrane proteins called T cell receptors-surface glycoproteins that recognize and bind to antigenic determinants while remaining part of the cell's plasma membrane. Like antibodies, T cell receptors have specific molecular configurations that bind to specific antigenic determinants. Once a T cell is bound to a determinant, it initiates  an immune response.19.3.3 Clonal selection accounts for the characteristic features of the immune response 359Each person possesses an enormous number of different B cells and T cells, apparently capable of dealing with almost any antigen ever likely to be encountered. How does this diversity arise? How do B and T cells specific for certain antigens proliferate? And why don't our antibodies and T cells attack and destroy our own bodies? The versatility of immune responses, the proliferation of specific cells, the ability to distinguish between self and nonself, and immunological memory can all be explained by the theory of clonal selection. According to clonal selection theory, each individual human contains an enormous variety of different B cells, and each type of B cell is able to produce only one kind of antibody. Thus there are millions of different B cells, each one producing a particular antibody and displaying it on the cell surface. When an antigen that fits this surface antibody binds to it, the B cell is activated. It divides to form a clone of cells, all of them producing that particular antibody. Thus, the antigen "selects" a particular antibody-producing B cell for proliferation. In the same way, an antigenic cell "selects" a T cell expressing a particular T cell receptor on its surface for proliferation. The clonal selection theory accounts nicely for the body's ability to respond rapidly to any of a vast number of different antigens. In the extreme case, even a single B cell might be sufficient for an immunological response by the body, provided that it encounters its antigen and then proliferates into a large clone rapidly enough to combat the invasion.19.3.4 Immunological memory and immunity result from clonal selection 360According to clonal selection theory, an activated lymphocyte (B cell or T cell) produces two types of daughter cells, effector cells and memory cells. effector cells carry out the attack on the antigen. They are either plasma cells that produce antibodies, or T cells that, upon binding an antigenic determinant, release messenger molecules called cytokines. Effector cells live only a few days. memory cells are long-lived cells that retain the ability to start dividing on short notice to produce more effector and more memory cells. Memory B and possibly T cells may survive for decades. When the body first encounters a particular antigen, a primary immune response is activated, and lymphocytes produce clones of effector and memory cells. The effector cells destroy the invaders at hand and then die, but one or more clones of memory cells have now been added to the immune system and provide immunological memory. After the body's first immune response to a particular antigen, subsequent encounters with the same antigen will result in a greater and more rapid production of antigen-specific antibody or T cells. This response is called the secondary immune response. The first time a vertebrate animal is exposed to a particular antigen, there is a time lag (usually several days) before the number of antibody molecules and T cells slowly increases. But for years afterward-sometimes for life-the immune system "remembers" that particular antigen. The secondary immune response has a shorter lag time, a greater rate of antibody production, and a larger production of total antibody or T cells than the primary response.
Thanks to immunological memory, recovery from many diseases, such as chicken pox,  provides a natural immunity to those diseases. However, it is possible to protect against many life-threatening diseases, such as typhoid or tetanus, by artificial immunity. Artificial immunity can be acquired by the introduction of antigenic proteins or other molecular antigens into the body in a process called immunization, or by the introduction of whole pathogens, live or rendered harmless, which is called vaccination. Immunization or vaccination initiates a primary immune response, generating memory cells without making the person ill. Later, if the same or very similar disease organisms attack, B memory cells already exist. They recognize the antigen and quickly overwhelm the invaders with a massive production of lymphocytes and antibodies. The ability of the human body to remember a specific antigen explains why immunization has almost completely wiped out deadly diseases such as diphtheria and polio in industrialized countries. In fact, smallpox has been eliminated worldwide, thanks to an international effort by the World Health Organization. As far as we know, the only remaining smallpox viruses on Earth are those kept in some laboratories.19.3.5 Animals distinguish self from nonself and tolerate their own antigens 360Given the presence of lymphocytes directed against so many antigens, why doesn't a healthy human produce self-destructive immune responses? The body is tolerant of its own molecules-the same molecules that would generate an immune response in another individual. Self-tolerance seems to be based on two mechanisms: clonal deletion and clonal anergy. Clonal deletion physically removes B or T cells from the immune system at some point during their differentiation. For example, immature B cells  in bone marrow may encounter self antigens.  Any of these cells that shows the potential to mount an immune response agains self antigens undergoes programmed cell death (apoptosis) within a short time, and never differentiates enough to make antibodies. Thus, no clones of antiself lymphocytes normally appear in the bloodstream. Clonal deletion eliminates about 90 percent of all the B cells made in the bone marrow. A similar process occurs with T cells in the thymus. Clonal anergy is the suppression of the immune response. For example, a mature T cell may encounter and recognize a self antigen on the surface of a body cell. But it does not send out the cytokines that signal the initiation of an immune response. Before it does so, the T cell must encounter not only an antigen, but also a second molecule called CD28 on the cell surface. This co-stimulatory signal is expressed only on certain cells called antigen-presenting cells. So most body cells, lacking CD28, will not be attacked by the cellular immune system. The phenomenon of immunological tolerance was discovered through the observation that some nonidentical twin cattle with different blood types contained some of each other's red blood cells. Why did these "foreign" blood cells not cause immune responses resulting in their elimination? The hypothesis suggested was that the blood cells had passed between the fetal animals in the womb before the lymphocytes had matured. Thus each calf regarded the other's red blood cells as self. This hypothesis was confirmed when it was shown that injecting foreign antigen into an animal early in fetal development caused that animal henceforth to recognize that antigen as self. Tolerance must be established repeatedly throughout the life of the animal because lymphocytes are produced constantly. Continued exposure to self antigen helps maintain tolerance. For unknown reasons, tolerance to self antigens may be lost. When this happens, the body produces antibodies or T cells against its own proteins, resulting in an autoimmune disease. 19.4 B Cells: The Humoral Immune Response 362Every day, billions of B cells survive the test of clonal deletion and are released from the bone marrow to enter the circulation. The B cells are the basis for the humoral immune response. Since each B cell expresses on its surface an antibody that is specific for a particular antigen, that antigen can bind to and activate the B cell, causing it to form a clone.19.4.1 Some B cells develop into plasma cells 362As described above, the activation of a B cell involves the binding of a particular antigenic determinant to the antibody protein on the surface of the B cell. Normally, for such a B cell to develop into antibody-secreting plasma cells, a helper T cell (TH) must also bind to the same antigen on an antigen-presenting cell. The cellular division and differentiation of the B cells is stimulated by the receipt of chemical signals from the antigen-responsive T cell. These events lead to the formation of plasma cells (the effector cells) and memory cells. As plasma cells develop, the number of ribosomes and the amount of endoplasmic reticulum in their cytoplasm increase greatly 1. These increases prepare the cells for synthesizing large amounts of antibodies for secretion. All the plasma cells arising from a given B cell produce identical antibodies specific for the antigen that originally bound to the parent B cell. Thus antibody specificity is maintained as B cells proliferate.19.4.2 Antibodies share a common structure, but may be of different classes 363Antibodies are proteins called immunoglobulins. There are several types of immunoglobulins, but all contain a tetramer consisting of four polypeptides. Two of these polypeptides are identical light chains, and two are identical heavy chains, designated by their different sizes. Disulfide bonds (;sbS;sbS;sb) hold the chains together. Each polypeptide chain consists of a constant region and a variable region 1. The constant regions of both light and heavy chains are similar in amino acid sequence from one immunoglobulin to another. The variable regions differ in their amino acid sequences. They contribute directly to the three-dimensional region where the antigen binds-the antigen-binding site-and are responsible for the diversity of antibody specificity. The amino acid sequence of the variable region is unique in each of the millions of antigen-specific immunoglobulins. Together the variable regions of a light and a heavy chain form a highly specific, three-dimensional structure. This part of a particular immunoglobulin molecule is what binds with a particular, unique antigenic determinant. The enormous range of antibody specificities is accomplished by a combination of rearrangements and mutations in the genes that encode the variable regions, as we will see later in the chapter. Although the variable regions are responsible for the specificity of an immunoglobulin, the constant regions are also important. The constant regions determine whether the antibody remains part of the cell's plasma membrane or is secreted into the bloodstream. The constant regions also determine the type of action to be taken in eliminating the antigen, as we will see shortly. The two antigen-binding sites on each immunoglobulin molecule are identical, permitting the formation of a large complex of antigen and antibody molecules. This complex is an easy target for ingestion and breakdown by phagocytic cells. The five immunoglobulin classes are based on differences in the constant region of the heavy chain. IgG molecules make up about 85 percent of the total immunoglobulin content of the bloodstream. They are made in greatest quantity during a second immune response. IgG defends the body in several ways. For example, after some IgG molecules bind to antigens, they become attached by their heavy chains to macrophages. This attachment permits the macrophages to destroy the antigens by phagocytosis.19.4.3 Hybridomas produce monoclonal antibodies 364Because most antigens carry many different antigenic determinants, animals injected with a single antigen will produce a complex mixture of antibodies. Each of the antibodies is made by a clone of B cells. So the normal antibody response is said to be polyclonal. We have learned in studies of biochemistry that many molecules share regions of similar structure. All human steroids, for example, have a similar multi-ring structure. Some antibodies made by an animal against any steroid will bid to these common antigenic determinants. But a particular steroid has some parts that are unique to that molecule, and some of the antibodies are directed against this region. Suppose that a woman is infertile and her physician needs to measure the levels of the hormone estrogen in her blood. This could be done by using an antibody directed against estrogen as a reagent, and seeing how much antigen-antibody complex formed with a sample of the woman's blood. A polyclonal group of antibodies against estrogen would not be useful,  however, because some of them, directed against common determinants, would bind to other steroid hormones as well as estrogen. Clearly, a clone of B cells making an antibody that binds only to a unique determinant-a monoclonal antibody-would be needed. But how can that clone be isolated and propagated? Unfortunately, B cells cannot be cultured. On the other hand, cancerous tumors of plasma cells, called myelomas, grow rapidly in culture. Each tumor arises from a single plasma cell. Some myeloma cells cultured in laboratories have lost the ability to produce antibodies: These cells live for a long time, but they do not secrete immunoglobulins. Scientists use these myeloma cells and normal B lymphocytes to produce hybrid cells called hybridomas, which make specific normal antibodies in quantity and which, like the myeloma cells, proliferate rapidly and indefinitely in culture. These clones produce monoclonal antibodies in large quantities and can be preserved and stored by freezing.
Monoclonal antibodies have many practical applications. For example, they have been invaluable in the development of immunoassays, which use the great specificity of the antibodies to detect tiny amounts of molecules in tissues and fluids. This technique is used to quantify hormones such as estrogen. Most human pregnancy tests use a monoclonal antibody to a hormone made by the developing embryo. Radioactively tagged monoclonal antibodies are used to target antigens on the surface of cancer cells, enabling precise imaging of the tumor so that the physician can monitor the progress of therapy. The cancer cell-targeted antibody, when attached to a poison, can be used to kill the tumor cells. Monoclonal antibodies are also used for passive immunization-inoculation with specific antibody rather than with an antigen that causes the patient to develop his or her own antibody (as most vaccines are designed to do). Passive immunization is the approach used to treat the early symptoms of rabies infection or a rattlesnake bite, cases in which the toxic nature of the infection is so serious that there is not enough time to allow the person's immune system to mount its own defense. 19.5 T Cells: The Cellular Immune Response 364Thus far we have been concerned primarily with the humoral immune response, whose effector molecules are the antibodies secreted by plasma cells that develop from activated B cells. T cells are the effectors of the cellular immune response, which is directed against any factor, such as a virus or mutation, that changes a normal cell into an abnormal cell. In this section, we will describe two types of T cells (helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells). We will discover that the binding of a T cell receptor to an antigenic determinant requires special proteins encoded by the MHC (major histocompatibility complex) genes. These proteins underlie the immune system's tolerance for the cells of its own body and are responsible for the rejection of foreign tissues by the body.19.5.1 T cell receptors are found on two types of T cells 365Like B cells, T cells possess specific surface receptors. T cell receptors are not immunoglobulins, but glycoproteins with molecular weights about half that of an IgG. They are made up of two polypeptide chains, each encoded by a separate gene. The genes that code for T cell receptors are similar to those for immunoglobulins, suggesting that both are derived from a single, evolutionarily more ancient group of genes. Like the immunoglobulins, T cell receptors include both variable and constant regions. The variable regions provide the specificity for reaction with a single antigenic determinant. There is a major difference between antibodies and T cell receptors: While antibodies bind to an intact antigen, T cell receptors bind to a piece of the antigen displayed on the surface of an antigen-presenting cell. When T cells are activated by contact with a specific antigenic determinant, they proliferate and give rise to two types of effector cells. Lytotoxic T cells, or TC cells, recognize virus-infected cells and kill them by causing them to lyse. Helper T cells, or TH cells, assist both the cellular and humoral immune systems. As mentioned already, a specific TH cell must bind an antigen presented on a B cell before that B cell can become activated. The helper cell becomes the "conductor" of the "immunological orchestra," as it sends out chemical signals that not only result in its own clonal expansion, but also set in motion the actions of cytotoxic T cells as well as B cells. Now that we are familiar with the major types of T cells, we can address the question of how T cells meet the antigenic determinants.19.5.2 The major histocompatibility complex encodes proteins that present antigens to the immune system 366We have seen that a body's defenses recognize its own cells as self-that proteins on our own cell surfaces are tolerated by our immune systems. There are several types of mammalian cell surface proteins, but we will focus on one very important group, the products of a cluster of genes called the major histocompatibility complex, or MHC. The MHC gene products are plasma membrane glycoproteins-proteins with attached carbohydrate groups. In humans, the MHC molecules are called human leukocyte antigens (HLA), while in mice they are called H-2 proteins. Their major role is to "present" antigens on the cell surface to a T cell receptor. There are three classes of MHC proteins: Class I MHC proteins are present on the surface of every nucleated cell in the animal. When cellular proteins are degraded to small peptide fragments in the proteasome, an MHC I protein may bind to a fragment and travel to the plasma membrane. There, the MHC I protein "presents" the cellular peptide to TC cells. The TC cells have a surface protein called CD8 that recognizes MHC I. Class II MHC proteins are found mostly on the surfaces of B cells, macrophages, and other antigen-presenting cells. When an antigen-presenting cell ingests an antigen, such as a virus, it is broken down in an endosome. An MHC II molecule may bind to one of the fragments and carry it to the cell surface, where it is presented to a TH cell 1. TH cells have a surface protein called CD4 that recognizes MHC II. Class III MHC proteins include some of the proteins of the complement system that interact with antigen-antibody complexes and result in the lysis of foreign cells. To accomplish their roles in antigen binding and presentation, both MHC I and MHC II have an antigen-binding groove, which can hold a peptide of about 10-20 amino acids 1. The T cell receptor recognizes not just the antigenic fragment, but the fragment bound to an MHC I or MHC II molecule. Table 19.3 summarizes the relationships of T cells and antigen-presenting cells. There are three genetic loci each for MHC I and MHC II, and all six loci have as many as 100 different alleles. With so many possible allelic combinations, it is not surprising that different individuals are very likely to have different MHC genotypes. Similarities in base sequences between MHC genes and the genes coding for antibodies and T cell receptors suggest that all three may have descended from the same ancestral genes and are part of a "superfamily." Major aspects of the immune systems seem to be woven together by a common evolutionary thread.19.5.3 Helper T cells and MHC II proteins contribute to the humoral immune response 367When a TH cell binds to an antigen-presenting macrophage, the TH cell releases cytokines, which activate it to produce a clone of differentiated cells capable of interacting with B cells. The steps to this point constitute the activation phase of the response, and they occur in lymphatic tissue. Next comes the effector phase, in which B cells are activated to produce antibodies. B cells are also antigen-presenting cells. B cells take up by endocytosis antigen bound to their immunoglobulin receptors, process it, and display it on class II MHC proteins. When a TH cell binds to the displayed antigen-MHC II complex, it releases cytokines that cause the B cell to produce a clone of plasma cells. Finally, the plasma cells secrete antibody, completing the effector phase of the humoral immune response.19.5.4 Cytotoxic T cells and MHC I proteins contribute to the cellular immune response 367Class I MHC molecules play a role in the cellular immune response that is similar to the role played by class II MHC molecules in the humoral immune response. In virus-infected or mutated cells, "foreign" proteins or peptide fragments combine with MHC class I molecules. The complex is displayed on the cell surface and presented to TC cells. When a TC cell binds to this complex,  it is activated to proliferate and differentiate. In the effector phase of the cellular immune response, TC cells produce molecules that lyse the target cell. In addition, the TC cell can bind to a specific receptor on the target cell, called Fas, that initiates apoptosis in the target cell. These two mechanisms, cell lysis and programmed cell death, work in concert to eliminate the altered host cell. Because T cell receptors recognize self MHC molecules complexed with nonself antigens, they help rid the body of its own virus-infected cells. Because they also recognize MHC molecules complexed with altered self antigens (as a result of mutations), they help eliminate tumor cells, since most tumor cells have mutations. In addition to the binding of an antigen-MHC complex to a cell surface receptor, T cells must receive a second signal for activation. This "co-stimulatory" signal occurs after the initial specific binding, and involves the interaction of additional proteins on the T cell and antigen-presenting cell. This second binding event leads to T cell activation, including cytokine production and cell division. It also sets in motion the production of an inhibitor of these events, so that the response is appropriately terminated. This inhibitor, a cell surface protein called CTLA4, is also important for the acquisition of tolerance, the capacity to avoid attacking one's own antigenic determinants.19.5.5 MHC molecules underlie the tolerance of self 367MHC molecules play a key role in establishing tolerance to self, without which an animal would be destroyed by its own immune system. Throughout the animal's life, developing T cells are tested in the thymus. One test question is, Can this cell recognize the body's MHC proteins? A T cell unable to recognize self MHC proteins would be useless to the animal because it could not participate in any immune reactions. Such a T cell fails the test and dies within about 3 days. The second question is, Does this cell bind to self MHC protein and to one of the body's own antigens? A T cell that satisfied both of these criteria would be harmful or lethal to the animal; it also fails the test and undergoes apoptosis. T cells that survive these tests mature into either TC cells or TH cells.19.5.6 MHC molecules are responsible for transplant rejection 368In humans, a major consequence of the MHC molecules became important with the development of organ transplant surgery. Because the proteins produced by the MHC are specific to each individual, they act as antigens if transplanted into another individual. An organ or a piece of skin transplanted from one person to another is recognized as nonself and soon provokes an immune response; the tissue then is killed, or "rejected," by the cellular immune system. But if the transplant is performed immediately after birth, or if it comes from a genetically identical person (an identical twin), the material is recognized as self and is not rejected. The rejection problem can be overcome by treating a patient with drugs, such as cyclosporin, that suppress the immune system. However, this approach compromises the ability of patients to defend themselves against bacteria and viruses. Cyclosporin and some other immunosuppressants interfere with communication between cells of the immune system. Specifically, they inhibit the production of cytokines. 19.6 The Genetic Basis of Antibody Diversity 368A newborn mammal possesses a full set of genetic information for immunoglobulin synthesis. At each of the loci coding for the heavy and light chains, it has an allele from the mother and one from the father. Throughout the animal's life, each of its cells begins with the same full set of genes. However, as B cells develop, their genomes become modified in such a way that each cell eventually can produce one-and only one-specific type of antibody. In other words, different B cells develop slightly different genomes encoding different antibody specificities. How can a single organism produce millions of different immunoglobulins? One hypothesis was that we simply have millions of antibody genes. However, a simple calculation (the number of base pairs needed per antibody gene multiplied by millions) shows that if this were true, our entire genome would be taken up by antibody genes. More than 30 years ago, an alternative hypothesis was proposed: that a relatively small number of genes recombine at the DNA level to produce many unique combinations, and it is this shuffling of the genetic deck that produces antibody diversity. This is now the accepted theory. In this section, we will describe the unusual events that generate the enormous antibody diversity normally characterizing each individual mammal. Then we will see how similar events produce the five classes of antibodies by producing slightly different "constant regions" that have special properties.19.6.1 Antibody diversity results from DNA rearrangement and other mutations 369In an unusual genetic process, functional immunoglobulin genes are assembled from DNA segments that initially are spatially separate. Every cell in the body has hundreds of DNA segments potentially capable of participating in the synthesis of the variable regions of the Ig molecule. In most body cells these DNA sequences remain intact and separate from one another.During B cell development, however, these DNA segments are rearranged and joined. Pieces of the DNA are deleted, and DNA segments formerly distant from one another are joined together. In this fashion, an immunoglobulin gene is assembled from randomly selected pieces of DNA. Each B cell precursor in the animal assembles its own unique set of immunoglobulin genes. This remarkable process generates many diverse antibodies from the same starting genome. The same type of process also accounts for the diversity of T cell receptors. In both humans and mice, the DNA segments coding for immunoglobulin heavy chains are on one chromosome and those for light chains are on others. The variable region of the light chain is encoded by two families of DNA segments, and the variable region of the heavy chain is encoded by three families.

There are multiple genes coding for each of four kinds of segments in the polypeptide chain: 100 V, 30 D, 6 J, and 8 C. Each B cell that becomes committed to making an antibody randomly selects one gene for each of these segments to make the final heavy-chain coding sequence, VDJC. So the number of different heavy chains that can be made through this random recombination process is quite large. Now consider that the light chains are similarly constructed, with a similar amount of diversity made possible by random recombination. If we assume that light-chain diversity is the same as heavy-chain diversity (144,000 possibilities), the number of possible combinations of light and heavy chains is 144,000 different light chains; 144,000 different heavy chains = 21 billion possibilities! Even if this number is an overestimate by severalfold (and it is), the number of different immunoglobulin molecules that a B cell can make is huge. But there are still other mechanisms that generate even more diversity: when the DNA sequences for the V, J, and C regions are rearranged so that they are next to one another, the recombination event is not precise, and errors occur at the junctions. This imprecise recombination can create new codons at the junctions, with resulting amino acid changes. after the DNA fragments are cut out and before they are joined, an enzyme, terminal transferase, often adds some nucleotides to the free ends of the DNA's. These additional bases create insertion mutations. finally, there is a relatively high mutation rate in immunoglobulin genes. Once again, this process creates many new alleles and antibody diversity. Adding these possibilities to the billions of combinations that can be made by random DNA rearrangements makes it not surprising that the immune system can mount a response to almost any natural or human-made substance.19.6.2 How does a B cell produce a specific heavy chain? 370As an example of how DNA rearrangement generates antibody diversity, let's consider how the heavy chain of IgM is produced in the mouse, a favorite subject for immunology studies. The gene families governing all heavy-chain synthesis are on mouse chromosome 12. Light chains are produced from similar families, but they lack D segments. How does order emerge from this seeming chaos of DNA segments? Two distinct types of nucleic acid rearrangements contribute to the formation of an antibody: DNA rearrangements, before transcription, join the V, D, and J segments. DNA splicing, after transcription, joins the variable region (VDJ) to the constant region. First, substantial chunks of DNA are deleted from the chromosome during rearrangement of the segments. As a result of these deletions, a particular D segment ends up directly beside a particular J segment, and then the DJ segment ends up adjacent to one of the V segments. Thus, a single "new" sequence, consisting of one V, one D, and one J segment, can now code for the variable region of the heavy chain. All the progeny of this cell constitute a clone having the same sequence for the variable region.The second step follows transcription. Splicing of the RNA transcript removes introns and any J segments lying between the selected J segment and the first constant region segment. The result is an mRNA that can be translated, directly yielding the heavy chain of the cell's specific antibody.19.6.3 The constant region is involved in class switching 371Generally, a B cell makes only one class at a time. But class switching can occur, in which a B cell changes which antibody class it synthesizes. Early in its life, a B cell produces IgM molecules, which are responsible for the specific recognition of a particular antigenic determinant. At this time, the constant region of the antibody's heavy chain is encoded by the first constant region segment, the ? segment 1. If the B cell later becomes a plasma cell during an immunological response, another deletion commonly occurs in the cell's DNA, positioning the heavy-chain variable region gene (consisting of the same V, D, and J segments) next to a constant region segment farther down the original DNA, such as the ?, ?, or ? segments 2. Such a DNA deletion results in the production of an antibody with a different constant region and function, but the same antigen specificity. The new antibody has the same variable regions of the light and heavy chains, but a different constant region of the heavy chain. This new antibody falls into one of the four other immunoglobulin classes (IgA, IgD, IgE, or IgG), depending on which of the constant region segments is placed adjacent to the variable region gene. After switching classes, the plasma cell cannot go back to making the previous immunoglobulin class, because that part of the DNA has been deleted and lost. On the other hand, if additional constant region segments are still present, the cell may switch classes again. What triggers class switching, and what determines the class to which a given B cell will switch? TH cells direct the course of an antibody response and determine the nature of the attack on the antigen. These T cells induce class switching by sending cytokine signals 2. These signals bind to receptors on the target B cells, generating a signal transduction cascade and resulting in altered transcription of immunoglobulin genes. 19.7 The Evolution of Animal Defense Systems 372The strategy of rearranging DNA to make variable antibodies is used by all vertebrates with jaws, but nowhere else in the animal world. It is an "anticipatory" strategy, since the organism makes not only the defensive proteins that it needs, but also the antibodies and T cell receptors that it might need. Therefore, it must have provided an evolutionary advantage to the organisms that first had it. This anticipatory strategy may first have arisen in an ancient creature resembling today's sharks, when a transposon inserted itself into a gene used for a defensive protein. Over time, this inserted element developed the ability to cut out adjacent DNA sequences and move them elsewhere in the genome. The invertebrates, in all their diversity, have sturdy innate defense systems, and certain defense system elements are found even in unicellular protists. Many protists carry on phagocytosis, as do our own macrophages, and some protists use phagocytosis as a defense mechanism. Multicellular animals, both invertebrate and vertebrate, employ mobile phagocytic cells to patrol their bodies. Like vertebrates, invertebrates (and probably some protists) distinguish between self and nonself. Making such distinctions enables invertebrates to reject tissue grafted from other individuals of the same species. Unlike vertebrates, however, invertebrates reject a second graft no more rapidly than a first graft-indicating that invertebrates lack immunological memory. This and other observations show that although immunological functions of invertebrates and vertebrates may be similar, their mechanisms often differ. Invertebrates do not produce immunoglobulins, lymphocytes, or the complement system. However, they achieve similar defensive goals by analogous methods, and the analogs are probably evolutionary precursors of the systems found in vertebrates. Many invertebrates make proteins very similar to vertebrate cytokines, and those proteins play regulatory roles similar to those in humans. 19.8 Disorders of the Immune System 372Immune deficiency diseases such as AIDS show us how much we depend on our immune system to protect us from pathogens. However, sometimes the immune system fails us in one way or another. It may overreact, as in an allergy; it may attack self antigens, as in an autoimmune disease; or it may function weakly or not at all, as in an immune deficiency disease. After a look at allergies and autoimmune conditions, we will examine the acquired immune deficiency that characterizes AIDS.19.8.1 An inappropriately active immune system can cause problems 372A common type of condition arises when the human immune system overreacts to a dose of antigen (hypersensitivity). Although the antigen itself may present no danger to the host, the inappropriate immune response may produce inflammation and other symptoms that can cause serious illness or death. Allergies are the most familiar examples of such a problem.There are two types of allergic reactions. Immediate hypersensitivity occurs when an individual makes large amounts of IgE that bind to a molecule or structure in a food, pollen, or the venom of an insect. Mast cells in tissues and basophils in blood bind the IgE, which causes them to release amines such as histamine. The result is symptoms such as dilation of blood vessels, inflammation, and difficulty breathing. If not treated with antihistamines, a severe allergic reaction can lead to death. Delayed hypersensitivity does not begin until hours after exposure to an antigen. In this case, the antigen is processed by antigen-presenting cells and a T cell response is initiated. This response can be so massive that the cytokines released cause macrophages to become activated and damage tissues. This is what happens when the bacteria that cause tuberculosis colonize the lung.autoimmunity.
Sometimes clonal deletion fails, resulting in the appearance of one or more "forbidden clones" of B and T cells directed against self antigens (autoimmunity). This failure does not always result in disease, but in some instances it can. People with systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE) have antibodies to many cellular components, including DNA and nuclear proteins. These antinuclear antibodies can cause serious damage when they link up with normal tissue antigens to form circulating immune complexes, which become stuck in tissues and provoke inflammation. A person with SLE has hyperactive B cells (thus the excess antibodies). On the other hand, a person with rheumatoid arthritis has difficulty in shutting down a T cell response. We mentioned earlier that the inhibitor CTLA4 blocks T cells from reacting to self antigens. People with rheumatoid arthritis may have low CTLA4 activity, which results in inflammation of joints due to the infiltration of excess white blood cells. Multiple sclerosis usually affects young adults, causing progressive damage to the nervous system. It involves both T cell- and B cell-mediated attack on two major proteins in myelin, the special membrane that coats some nervous tissues. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, or type I diabetes, occurs most often in children. It involves an immune reaction against several proteins in the cells of the pancreas that manufacture the protein hormone insulin. This reaction results in the cells being killed. These patients must take insulin daily in order to survive.The causes of these autoimmune diseases are not known. They tend to "run in families," indicating a genetic component. Some alleles of MHC II are strongly linked to certain of these diseases. In some cases, the underlying reason may be molecular mimicry, in which T cells that recognize a nonself antigen also recognize something on the self that has a similar structure.19.8.2 AIDS is an immune deficiency disorder 373There are various immune deficiency disorders, such as those in which T or B cells never form, and others in which B cells lose the ability to give rise to plasma cells. In either case, the affected individual is unable to mount an immune response and thus lacks a major line of defense against microbial pathogens. Because of its essential roles in both the humoral and cellular immune responses, the TH cell is perhaps the most central of all the components of the immune system-a significant cell to lose to an immune deficiency disorder. This cell is the target of HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), the virus that eventually results in AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).HIV is transmitted from person to person in several ways: through blood, such as by an injection needle contaminated with the virus after being used by an infected individual; through exposure of broken skin, an open wound, or mucous membranes to body fluids such as semen containing HIV; through the blood of an infected mother to her newborn baby during birth. HIV initially infects macrophages, TH cells, and dendritic cells in blood and tissues. Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells with highly folded plasma membranes that can capture antigens. These infected cells carry the virus to the lymphoid tissues (lymph nodes and spleen) where B cells mature and T cells reside. Normally, in the lymph node, the dendritic cells present their captured antigen to TH cells, and this causes the TH cells to divide and form a clone 1. But HIV preferentially infects activated, and not resting, TH cells. So the HIV arriving in the lymph nodes proceeds to infect the many activated TH cells that are already responding to other antigens. These two processes-having cells take the virus to the nodes and having cells in the nodes already receptive to virus infection-combine to ensure that HIV reproduces vigorously. Up to 10 billion viruses are made every day during this phase. The numbers of TH cells quickly drop, and people show symptoms similar to mononucleosis, such as enlarged lymph nodes and fever.
These symptoms abate within 3 weeks, however, when T cells recognize infected lymphocytes, an immune response is mounted, and antibodies appear in the blood. By this time, several months after initial infection, the patient has a lot of circulating HIV complexed with antibodies that is gradually removed by the action of dendritic cells. But before they are filtered out, these antibody-complexed viruses can still infect TH cells that come in contact with them. This secondary infection process reaches a low, steady-state level called the "set point." This point varies between people, and is a strong predictor of the rate of progression of the disease. For most people, it takes 8-10 years, even if untreated, for the more severe manifestations of AIDS to develop. In some, this can be as little as a year; in others, 20 years. During this "incubation period," infected people generally feel fine, and their TH cell levels are adequate for them to mount immune responses. However, in time, the virus destroys the TH cells, and their numbers fall to dangerous levels. At this point, the infected patient is considered to have full-blown AIDS, and is susceptible to infections that the TH cells would normally have been involved in eliminating 2. Most notable are the otherwise rare skin tumor called Kaposi's sarcoma caused by a herpes virus, pneumonia caused by the fungus Pneumocystis carinii, and lymphoma tumors caused by Epstein-Barr virus. These are called opportunistic infections, because they take advantage of the crippled immune system of the host. They lead to death within a year or two.19.8.3 HIV infection and replication occur in TH cells 373As a retrovirus, HIV uses RNA as its genetic material. A central core, with a protein coat, contains two identical molecules of RNA, as well as the enzymes reverse transcriptase, integrase, and a protease. An envelope, derived from the plasma membrane of the cell in which the virus was formed, surrounds the core. The envelope is studded with envelope proteins (gp120 and gp41, where "gp" stands for glycoprotein) that enable the virus to infect its target cells. The HIV replication cycle has several stages. HIV attaches to TH cells and macrophages via CD4, which acts as a receptor for the viral envelope protein gp120. Following binding, the membrane that surrounds the HIV core particle fuses with the host cell plasma membrane, resulting in the entry of the core into the cytoplasm 25. These events require the participation of at least two other membrane proteins, one from the virus (gp4 and another from the host (appropriately called fusin in TH cells). HIV can insert a cDNA copy of its genome into the host cell's DNA. The process of making a cDNA copy from viral RNA occurs in the viral core particle in an infected cell. It requires the participation of three separate enzymes: reverse transcriptase, to make single-stranded DNA from an RNA template; dNAse H, to degrade the viral RNA; dNA polymerase, to make the second strand of cDNA.
HIV reverse transcriptase does not have the proofreading activity of many DNA polymerases, so the errors that inevitably creep into the process are not corrected. Up to 10 incorrect bases out of about 8,000 may end up in each cDNA produced. This is a great advantage to the virus, as genomic mutations allow its proteins to escape the host's immune response, but present a challenge to scientists trying to design drugs and vaccines to bind to the constantly changing viral proteins. The viral core proteins have an amino acid sequence that is recognized by a receptor on the surface of the host cell's nucleus. So the particle rapidly enters the nucleus. At this point, a viral enzyme called integrase catalyzes the breakage of host DNA and insertion of viral cDNA. This is similar to the way in which bacteriophage DNA becomes incorporated into a bacterial chromosome as a prophage. The cDNA thus becomes a permanent part of the TH cell's DNA, replicating with it at each cell division, and may remain in the TH cell genome for a decade or more.virus production. This latent period ends if the HIV-infected TH cell becomes activated as it responds naturally to an antigen. The expression of viral genes requires the collaboration of host transcription factors that are made in activated TH cells and a virally encoded protein calledTat. When the TH cell is activated, the entire viral genome is transcribed into RNA, which can either remain as it is or be spliced. Unspliced RNA's become the genomes of new HIV particles; spliced RNA's make the viral structural proteins. An important activator of splicing is the viral protein called Rev. The protease encoded by HIV is needed to complete the formation of individual viral proteins from larger products of translation. Packaging domains on viral proteins cause the RNA genomes to fold into them and form core particles. In the meantime, the viral membrane proteins are made on the endoplasmic reticulum of the host cell and transported to the plasma membrane via the Golgi complex. The cytoplasmic tails of the gp120 membrane proteins bind to the core particles, and the viruses bud from the infected cell, surrounding themselves with modified plasma membrane from the host.19.8.4 Treatments for HIV infection rely on knowledge of its molecular biology 374As the AIDS epidemic has grown, so has knowledge of HIV molecular biology. The general therapeutic strategy is to try to block a stage in the viral life cycle and hold HIV infection in check. Potential therapeutic agents that interfere with the major steps of the life cycle are being tested. Of course, it is crucial to block steps that are unique to the virus, so that drug therapies do not harm the patient by blocking a step in the patient's own metabolism. Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) was developed in the late 1990s and has had considerable success in delaying the onset of AIDS symptoms in people infected with HIV by 3 years or more, and in prolonging the lives of people with AIDS. The logic of HAART comes from cancer treatment: Employ a combination of drugs acting at different parts of the virus life cycle. Generally, the HAART regimen usesa protease inhibitor. These drugs obstruct the active site of the HIV protease. two reverse transcriptase inhibitors. These molecules are incorporated into the growing cDNA chain, but no nucleotides can be added to them, so reverse transcription stops. These drugs have had such dramatic effects on patients that they may eliminate HIV entirely in some people, especially in those treated within the first few days after infection, before the virus has arrived in the lymph nodes. Most patients, however, face a lifetime of anti-HIV therapy. There are many treatments under development, including: vaccines to inhibit virus entry into cells and to form immune complexes with circulating viruses.integrase inhibitors, to block cDNA incorporation into the hostgenome. Hat and Rev inhibitors, to block HIV transcription and splicing. antisense RNA and ribozymes directed against HIV RNA. What can be done until biomedical science provides the tools to bring the worldwide AIDS epidemic to an end? Above all, people must recognize that they are in danger whenever they have sex with a partner whose total sexual history is not known. The danger rises as the number of sex partners rises, and the danger is much greater if partners participating in sexual intercourse are not protected by a latex condom. The danger that heterosexual intercourse will transmit HIV rises tenfold to a hundredfold if either partner has another sexually transmitted disease.