34 The Plant BodyThe oldest known plant is a bristlecone pine that has been living for more than 4,900 years-almost 50 centuries. In contrast, it is doubtful that any animal has ever lived as long as 2 centuries. The extreme ages achieved by some trees prove that plants can cope very successfully with their environments. Plants cannot move, but they have mechanisms for coping with environmental changes that they can't escape. They create and maintain an internal environment that differs from the external environment. They also regulate their own metabolism, which enables them to perform their necessary functions. Motion is not a characteristic of plants; instead, we may think of plants as "growing machines." By growing, plants accomplish some of the same things that animals achieve through motion. Growing roots, for example, can reach into new supplies of water and nutrients. Although they have simpler nutritional needs than animals do, plants must nevertheless obtain nutrients-not only the raw materials of photosynthesis (carbon dioxide and water), but also mineral elements such as nitrogen, potassium, and calcium. Seed plants-even the tallest trees-transport water from the soil to their tops, and they transport the products of photosynthesis from the leaves to their roots and other parts. Plants also interact with their living and nonliving environments. They respond to environmental cues as they grow and develop. Their responses are mediated by chemical signals that move within cells and throughout the plant body. Among the resulting changes are ones that lead to growth, development, and reproduction. Because we can understand the function of these growing machines only in terms of their underlying structure, this chapter focuses on the structure of the plant body, with primary emphasis on flowering plants. We'll examine plant structure at the level of the organs, cells, tissues, and tissue systems. Then we'll see how meristems-organized groups of dividing cells-serve the growth of the plant body, both in length and, in woody plants, in width. The chapter concludes with a consideration of how leaf structure supports photosynthesis. 34.1 Vegetative Organs of the Flowering Plant Body 603You will recall from Chapter 29 that flowering plants (angiosperms) are tracheophytes that are characterized by double fertilization, a triploid endosperm, and seeds enclosed in modified leaves called carpels. Their xylem contains cells called vessel elements and fibers, and their phloem contains companion cells. Flowering plants possess three kinds of vegetative (nonreproductive) organs: roots, stems, and leaves. Flowers, which are the plant's devices for sexual reproduction, consist of other types of organs that will be considered in a later chapter. Most flowering plants belong to one of two major lineages. Monocots (Monocotyledones) are generally narrow-leaved flowering plants such as grasses, lilies, orchids, and palms. Eudicots (Eudicotyledones) are broad-leaved flowering plants such as soybeans, roses, sunflowers, and maples. These two monophyletic classes account for 97 percent of the species of flowering plants. Most of the remaining species (including water lilies and the lineage that include magnolias) are structurally similar to the eudicots.* *Traditionally, botanists have referred to all flowering plants other than monocots as dicots. However, the dicots do not constitute a monophyletic lineage. Because we wish to emphasize lineages, we do not use that term here. The basic body plans of a generalized monocot and a generalized eudicot. In both lineages, the vegetative plant body consists of two systems: the shoot system and the root system. The shoot system of a plant consists of the stems and the leaves, as well as flowers (which contain leaflike parts). Broadly speaking, the leaves are the chief organs of photosynthesis. The stems hold and display the leaves to the sun, maximizing photosynthesis, and provide connections for the transport of materials between roots and leaves. The points where leaves attach to a stem are called nodes, and the stem regions between successive nodes are internodes. The root system provides support and nutrition. Roots anchor the plant in place, and their extreme branching and high surface area-to-volume ratio adapt them to absorb water and mineral nutrients from the soil. Each of the vegetative organs can best be understood in terms of its function and its structure. By structure we mean both its overall form and its microscopic anatomy-the component cells and tissues, as well as their arrangement. Let's first consider the overall forms of roots, stems, and leaves.34.1.1 Roots anchor the plant and take up water and minerals 605Water and minerals usually enter the plant through the root system, which usually lies in the soil, mostly in complete darkness. There are two principal types of root systems. Many eudicots have a taproot system: a single, large, deep-growing primary root accompanied by less prominent lateral roots. The taproot itself often functions as a food storage organ, as in carrots and radishes. By contrast, monocots and some eudicots have a fibrous root system, which is composed of numerous thin roots roughly equal in diameter. Many fibrous root systems have a large surface area for the absorption of water and minerals. A fibrous root system holds soil very well. Grasses with fibrous root systems, for example, may protect steep hillsides where runoff from rain would otherwise cause erosion. Some plants have what are called adventitious roots. These roots arise from points along the stem where roots would not usually occur; some even arise from the leaves. In many species, adventitious roots also form when a piece of shoot is cut from the plant and placed in water or soil. Adventitious rooting enables the cutting to establish itself in the soil. Some plants-corn, banyan trees, and some palms, for example-use adventitious roots as props to help support the shoot.34.1.2 Stems bear buds, leaves, and flowers 605Unlike roots, stems bear buds of various types. A bud is an embryonic shoot. A stem bears leaves at its nodes, and where each leaf meets the stem there is a lateral bud, which can develop into a new branch, or extension of the stem, if it becomes active. The branching patterns of plants are highly variable, depending on the species, environmental conditions, and a gardener's pruning activities. At the tip of each stem or branch is an apical bud, which produces the cells for the growth and development of that stem or branch. At times that vary depending on the species, buds form that develop into flowers. Some stems are highly modified. The tuber of a potato, for example-the part of the plant eaten by humans-is a portion of the stem rather than a root. Its "eyes" contain lateral buds; thus, a sprouting potato is just a branching stem. The runners of strawberry plants and Bermuda grass are horizontal stems from which roots grow at frequent intervals. If the links between the rooted portions are broken, independent plants can develop on each side of the break. This is a form of vegetative reproduction, which we will discuss in a later chapter. Unlike most roots, stems may be green and capable of photosynthesis. But stems are not the principal sites of photosynthesis.34.1.3 Leaves are the primary sites of photosynthesis 605In gymnosperms and most flowering plants, the leaves are responsible for most of the plant's photosynthesis, producing energy-rich organic molecules and releasing oxygen gas. Most leaves also carry out metabolic reactions that make nitrogen available to the plant for the synthesis of proteins and nucleic acids. In some plants, leaves play a key role in initiating sexual reproduction (flowering), as the "timer" by which those plants measure the length of the night is located in the leaves. In certain plants, leaves are highly modified for more specialized functions, as we will see below. As photosynthetic organs, leaves are marvelously adapted for gathering light. Typically, the blade of a leaf is a thin, flat structure attached to the stem by a stalk called a petiole. During the daytime the leaf blade is held by its petiole at an angle almost perpendicular to the rays of the sun. This placement, with the leaf surface facing the sun, maximizes the amount of light available for photosynthesis. Some leaves track the sun, moving so that they constantly face it. If leaves were thicker than they are, the outer layers of cells would absorb so much of the light that the interior layers would be too dark and would be unable to photosynthesize. The leaves at different sites on a single plant may have quite different shapes. These shapes result from a combination of genetic, environmental, and developmental influences. Most species, however, bear leaves of a particular broadly defined type.  A leaf may be simple, consisting of a single blade, or compound, with blades, or leaflets, arranged along an axis or radiating from a central point. In a simple leaf, or in a leaflet of a compound leaf, the veins may be parallel to one another, as in monocots, or in a netlike arrangement, as in eudicots. The general development of a specific leaf pattern is programmed in the plant's genes and is expressed by differential growth of the leaf veins and of the tissue between the veins. As a result, plant taxonomists have often found leaf forms (outlines, margins, tips, bases, and patterns of arrangement) to be reliable characters for classification and identification. At least some of the forms probably look familiar to you. In some plant species, leaves are highly modified for special functions. Some leaves serve as storage depots for energy-rich molecules, as in the bulbs of onions. In other species-some of the succulents-the leaves store water. The spines of cacti are modified leaves. Certain leaves of poinsettias, dogwoods, and some other plants are brightly colored and help attract pollinating animals to the often less striking flowers. Many plants, such as peas, have tendrils-modified leaves that support the plant by wrapping around other plants. Leaves and other plant organs are composed of cells, tissues, and tissue systems. Let's now consider plant cells-the basic building blocks of plant organs. 34.2 Plant Cells 607Living plant cells have all the essential organelles common to eukaryotes. In addition, they have some distinguishing structures and organelles. Some plant cells contain chloroplasts or other plastids. Many plant cells contain vacuoles.every plant cell is surrounded by a cellulose-containing cell wall. Although most kinds of plant cells are alive when they perform their functions, certain others function only after their living parts have died and disintegrated. Other plant cells develop special chemical capabilities; for example, some can perform photosynthesis, and others produce and secrete waterproofing materials. Several plant cell types differ dramatically in the structure of their cell walls.34.2.1 Cell walls may be complex in structure 607The cytokinesis of a plant cell is completed when cell walls form, separating the two daughter cells. The daughter cells secrete a glue that constitutes the middle lamella, which forms a layer between them. Then each daughter cell secretes cellulose and other polysaccharides to form a primary wall, which continues to grow as the cell grows to its final size. Once cell expansion stops, a plant cell may deposit more polysaccharides, sometimes impregnated with further materials-such as lignin, characteristic of wood, or suberin, a complex lipid characteristic of cork-in one or more layers internal to the primary wall. These layers collectively form the secondary wall, which often serves supporting or waterproofing roles. Although the cell wall lies outside the plasma membrane of the cell, it is not a chemically inactive region. Chemical reactions in the wall play important roles in cell expansion and defense. Cell walls may thicken or be sculpted or perforated as part of differentiation into specialized cell types. Except where the secondary wall is made waterproof by added substances, the wall is porous to water and to most small molecules. Localized modifications in the walls of adjacent cells allow water and dissolved materials to move easily from cell to cell. In cells that have not developed a secondary wall, the primary wall usually has thin regions. Strands of cytoplasm called plasmodesmata (singular plasmodesma) pass through the primary wall in these regions, allowing substances to move freely from cell to cell without having to cross a plasma membrane. The plasmodesmata allow direct communication between plant cells, as discussed in Chapter 15. A plasmodesma is wide enough so that portions of the endoplasmic reticulum extend between cells. Under certain circumstances, a plasmodesma can enlarge dramatically, allowing even macromolecules and viruses to pass directly between cells. Even in cells with a waterproofed secondary wall, water and dissolved materials can pass from cell to cell by way of structures called pits. Pits are interruptions in the secondary wall that leave the thin regions of the primary wall, and thus the plasmodesmata, unobstructed.34.2.2 Parenchyma cells are alive when they perform their functions 608The most numerous cell type in young plants is the parenchyma cell. Parenchyma cells usually have thin walls, consisting only of a primary wall and the shared middle lamella. Many parenchyma cells have shapes similar to those of soap bubbles crowded into a limited space-shapes with 14 faces. They are usually not elongated or otherwise asymmetrical. Most have large central vacuoles. The photosynthetic cells in leaves are parenchyma cells filled with chloroplasts. Some nonphotosynthetic parenchyma cells store substances such as starch or lipids. In the cytoplasm of these cells, starch is often stored in specialized plastids called leucoplasts. Lipids may be stored as oil droplets, also in the cytoplasm. Some parenchyma cells appear to serve as "packing material" and play a vital role in supporting the stem. Others retain the capacity to divide and hence may give rise to new cells, as when a wound results in cell proliferation.34.2.3 Collenchyma cells provide flexible support while alive 608Collenchyma cells are supporting cells that lay down primary cell walls that are characteristically thick in the corners of the cells. Collenchyma cells are generally elongated. In these cells the primary wall thickens, but no secondary wall forms. Collenchyma provides support to leaf petioles, nonwoody stems, and growing organs. Tissue made of collenchyma cells is flexible, permitting stems and petioles to sway in the wind without snapping. The familiar "strings" in celery consist primarily of collenchyma.34.2.4 Sclerenchyma cells provide rigid support after they die 608In contrast to collenchyma, sclerenchyma cells have a thickened secondary wall that performs their major function: support. Many sclerenchyma cells function when dead. There are two types of sclerenchyma cells: elongated fibers and variously shaped sclereids. Fibers, often organized into bundles, provide relatively rigid support both in wood and in other parts of the plant. The bark of trees owes much of its mechanical strength to long fibers. Sclereids may pack together very densely, as in a nut's shell or in some seed coats. Isolated clumps of sclereids, called stone cells, in pears and some other fruits give them their characteristic gritty texture.34.2.5 Xylem transports water from roots to stems and leaves 608The xylem of tracheophytes conducts water from roots to aboveground plant parts. It contains conducting cells called tracheary elements, which undergo programmed cell death before they assume their function of transporting water and dissolved minerals. The evolutionarily more ancient tracheary elements, found in gymnosperms and other  tracheophytes, are tracheids-spindle-shaped cells interconnected by numerous pits in their cell walls. When the cell contents-nucleus and cytoplasm-disintegrate upon cell death, water can move with little resistance from one tracheid to its neighbors by way of pits. Flowering plants  evolved a water-conducting system made up of vessels. The individual cells that form vessels, called vessel elements, also die and become empty before they can transport water. These cells secrete a waterproofing substance into their cell walls, then break down their end walls, and finally die and disintegrate. The result is a hollow tube through which water can flow freely. Vessel elements are generally larger in diameter than tracheids; they are laid down end-to-end, so that each vessel is a continuous hollow tube consisting of many vessel elements and providing an open pipeline for water conduction. In the course of angiosperm evolution, vessel elements have become shorter, and their end walls have become less and less obliquely oriented and less obstructed. The xylem of many angiosperms also includes tracheids.34.2.6 Phloem translocates carbohydrates and other nutrients 608The transport cells of the phloem, unlike those of the xylem, are living cells. In flowering plants the characteristic cell of the phloem is the sieve tube member. Like vessel elements, these cells meet end-to-end. They form long sieve tubes, which transport carbohydrates and many other materials from their sources to tissues that consume or store them. In plants with mature leaves, for example, excess products of photosynthesis move from leaves to root tissues. As sieve tube members mature, plasmodesmata in the end walls enlarge, enhancing the connection between the contents of neighboring cells. The result is end walls that look like sieves, and are called sieve plates. As the holes in the sieve plates expand, the tonoplast (the membrane around the central vacuole) disappears. The nucleus and some of the other organelles in the sieve tube member also break down and thus do not clog the holes of the sieve.At functional maturity, a sieve tube is filled with sieve tube sap, consisting of water, sugars, and other solutes. This mixture moves from cell to cell along the sieve tube, carrying its dissolved sugars and other important materials with it. At the periphery of a sieve tube member, next to the cell wall and distinct from the sieve tube sap, is a layer of cytoplasm. This stationary layer of cytoplasm confines the remaining organelles. The sieve tube members have adjacent companion cells, produced along with the sieve tube member when a parent cell divides. Companion cells retain all their organelles and may, through the activities of their nuclei, regulate the performance of the sieve tube members. All these kinds of plant cells play important roles. Next let's see how they are organized into tissues and tissue systems. 34.3 Plant Tissues and Tissue Systems 610A tissue is an organized group of cells, working together as a functional unit. Parenchyma cells make up parenchyma tissue, a simple tissue-that is, a tissue composed of only one type of cell. Sclerenchyma and collenchyma are other simple tissues, composed, respectively, of sclerenchyma and collenchyma cells. Different cell types also combine to form complex tissues. Xylem and phloem are complex tissues, composed of more than one type of cell. As a result of its cellular complexity, xylem can perform a variety of functions, including transport, support, and storage. The xylem of angiosperms contains vessel elements and tracheids as conducting cells, thick-walled sclerenchyma fibers for support, and parenchyma cells that store food. The phloem of angiosperms includes sieve tube members, companion cells, fibers, sclereids, and parenchyma cells. Tissues, in turn, are grouped into tissue systems that extend throughout the body of the plant, from organ to organ. There are three tissue systems: vascular, dermal, and ground. The vascular tissue system, which includes the xylem and phloem, is the conductive, or "plumbing," system of the plant. All the living cells of the plant body require a source of energy and chemical building blocks. The phloem transports carbohydrates from sites of production-called sources (commonly the leaves)-to sites of utilization or storage-called sinks-elsewhere in the plant. The xylem distributes water and mineral ions taken up by the roots to the stem and leaves. The dermal tissue system is the outer covering of the plant. All parts of the young plant body are covered by an epidermis, which may be a single layer of cells or several layers. The epidermis contains epidermal cells and may also include specialized cell types, such as the guard cells that form stomata (pores) in leaves. The shoot epidermis secretes a layer of wax-covered cutin, the cuticle, that helps retard water loss from stems and leaves. The stems and roots of woody plants have an additional protective covering called the periderm, which will be discussed later in this chapter. The ground tissue system makes up the rest of a plant and consists primarily of parenchyma tissue, often supplemented by collenchyma or sclerenchyma tissue. Ground tissue functions primarily in storage, support, photosynthesis, and the production of defensive and attractive substances. In the discussions that follow, we'll examine how the tissue systems are organized in the different organs of a flowering plant. Let's begin by seeing how this organization develops as the plant grows.34.4 Forming the Plant Body 611In its early embryonic stages, a plant establishes the basic body plan for its mature form. Two patterns contribute to the plant body plan: The apical-basal pattern is the arrangement of cells and tissues along the main axis from root to shoot. The radial pattern is the concentric arrangement of tissue systems. These patterns arise through orderly development and are best understood in developmental terms.34.4.1 Plants and animals develop differently 611As the plant body grows, it may lose parts, and it forms new parts that may grow at different rates. The growing stem consists of modules or units, laid down one after another. Each unit consists of a node with its attached leaf or leaves, the internode below that node, and the lateral bud or buds at the base of that internode. New units are formed as long as the stem continues to grow. Each branch of a plant may be thought of as a unit that is in some ways independent of the other branches. A branch of a plant does not bear the same relationship to the remainder of the plant body as an arm does to the remainder of the human body. Among other things, branches form one after another, unlike arms, which form simultaneously during embryonic development. Also, branches often differ from one another in number of leaves and in the degree to which they themselves branch. Leaves are units of another sort, produced in fresh batches to take over the daily function of gathering energy for the plant. Leaves are usually short-lived, lasting weeks to a few years. Branches and stems are longer-lived, lasting from years to centuries. Root systems are also branching structures, and lateral roots are semi-independent units. As the root system grows, penetrating and exploring the soil environment, many roots die and are replaced by new ones. All parts of the animal body grow as an individual develops from embryo to adult, but this growth is determinate. That is, the growth of the individual and its parts ceases when the adult state is reached. The growth of stems and roots, by contrast, is indeterminate and is generated from specific regions of active cell division and cell expansion. The localized regions of cell division in plants are called meristems. Meristematic tissues are forever young, retaining the ability to produce new cells indefinitely. They are comparable to the stem cells found in animals. When a meristem cell divides, the two resulting cells initially take up no more volume than did the single cell prior to division. One daughter cell develops into another meristem cell the size of its parent, while the other daughter cell develops into a more specialized cell.34.4.2 A hierarchy of meristems generates a plant's body 612There are two types of meristems: Typical meristems give rise to the primary plant body, which is the entire body of  many plants. Lateral meristems give rise to the secondary plant body. The stems and roots of some plants (most obviously trees) form wood and become thick; it is the lateral meristems that give rise to the tissues responsible for this thickening. Apical meristems are located at the tips of roots and stems, and in buds. They elongate the plant body by producing the cells that subsequently expand and differentiate to form all plant organs. _hoot apical meristems supply the cells that extend stems and branches, allowing more leaves to form and photosynthesize. Root apical meristems supply the cells that extend roots, enabling the plant to "forage" for water and minerals. Both root and shoot apical meristems give rise to a set of cylindrical primary meristems that produce the primary tissues of the plant body. From the outside to the inside of the root or shoot, which are both cylindrical organs, the primary meristems are the protoderm, the ground meristem, and the procambium. They  give rise to the three tissue systems as follows: Apical meristems are responsible for primary growth, which leads to elongation and organ formation. All plant organs arise ultimately from cell divisions in the apical meristems, followed by cell expansion and differentiation. Primary growth gives rise to the entire body of many plants. Because meristems can continue to produce new organs, the plant body is much more variable in form than the animal body, whose organs are laid down only once, during embryonic development.
Some roots and stems develop a secondary body-what we commonly refer to as wood and bark. In an oak tree, for example, the secondary body constitutes almost the entire stem and root system. These complex tissues are derived from two lateral meristems: the vascular cambium and the cork cambium. The vascular cambium is a cylindrical tissue consisting primarily of vertically elongated cells that divide frequently. Toward the inside of the stem or root the dividing cells form new xylem, and toward the outside they form new phloem. As a tree grows in diameter, the outermost layers of the stem crack and fall off. Without the activity of the cork cambium, this sloughing off of the dermal tissues would expose the tree to potential damage, including excessive water loss or invasion by microorganisms. The cork cambium produces new protective cells, primarily in the outward direction. The walls of these cells become impregnated with suberin, which makes them waterproof. The layer of growth produced by the cork cambium is called the periderm. Growth in the diameter of stems and roots, produced by the vascular and cork cambia, is called secondary growth. It is the source of wood and bark. Wood is secondary xylem. Bark (periderm plus secondary phloem) is everything external to the vascular cambium. In some plants, meristems may remain active for years-even centuries. The bristlecone pine mentioned at the beginning of this chapter provides a dramatic example. Such plants grow in size, or at least in diameter, throughout their lives. Recall that this pattern of continuous growth is known as indeterminate growth. Determinate growth, which stops at some point, is characteristic of some plant parts, such as leaves, flowers, and fruits, as well as most animals. In the sections that follow, we'll examine how the various meristems give rise to the plant body.34.4.3 The root apical meristem gives rise to the root cap and the primary meristems 613The root apical meristem produces all the cells that contribute to growth in the length of the root. Some of the daughter cells from the apical end of the root apical meristem contribute to a root cap, which protects the delicate growing region of the root as it pushes through the soil. Cells of the root cap are often damaged or scraped away and must therefore be replaced constantly. The root cap is also the structure that detects the pull of gravity and thus controls the downward growth of roots. The daughter cells that are produced at the other end of the meristem elongate and lengthen the root. Following elongation, these cells differentiate, giving rise to the various tissues of the mature root. The growing region above the apical meristem-away from the root cap-comprises the three cylindrical primary meristems that give rise to the three tissue systems of the root: the protoderm, the ground meristem, and the procambium. The apical and primary meristems constitute the zone of cell division, the source of all the cells of the root's primary tissues. Just above this zone is the zone of cell elongation, where the newly formed cells are elongating and thus causing the root to reach farther into the soil. Above this is the zone of cell differentiation, where the cells are taking on specialized forms and functions. These three zones grade imperceptibly into one another; there is some cell division even as far up as the zone of cell differentiation, and some cells differentiate even in the zone of cell division.34.4.4 The products of the root's primary meristems become root tissues 613What are the products of the three primary meristems? The protoderm gives rise to the outer layer of cells-the epidermis-which is adapted for protection of the root and for the absorption of mineral ions and water. Epidermal cells are flattened, and many of them produce amazingly long, delicate root hairs that vastly increase the surface area of the root. It has been estimated that the root system of a mature rye plant has a total absorptive surface of more than 600 square meters. Root hairs grow out among the soil particles, probing nooks and crannies and taking up water and minerals. Internal to the epidermis, the ground meristem gives rise to a region of ground tissue that is many cells thick, called the cortex. The cells of the cortex are relatively unspecialized and often function in food storage. In many plants, but especially in trees, epidermal and sometimes cortical cells form an association with a fungus. This association, called a mycorrhiza, increases the absorption of minerals and water by the plant. Some plant species have poorly developed root hairs or no root hairs. These plants cannot survive unless they develop mycorrhizae that help them with mineral absorption. Proceeding inward, we come to the endodermis of the root, a single cylindrical layer of cells that is the innermost cell layer of the cortex. The cell walls of the endodermal cells differ markedly from those of the other cortical cells. Endodermal cell walls contain suberin, which forms a waterproof seal wherever it is present. The placement of the seal in just certain parts of the wall enables endodermal cells to control the access of water and dissolved ions to the vascular tissues. Moving inward past the endodermis, we enter the vascular cylinder, or stele, produced by the procambium. The stele consists of three tissues: pericycle, xylem, and phloem. The pericycle consists of one or more layers of relatively undifferentiated cells. It is the tissue within which lateral roots arise. The pericycle also contributes to secondary growth. At the very center of the root of a eudicot lies the xylem-seen in cross section as a star with a variable number of points. Between the points are bundles of phloem. In monocots, a region of parenchyma cells, called the pith, lies in the center of the root. The pith often stores carbohydrate reserves. It is useful to try picturing these structures in three dimensions, rather than attempting to understand their functions solely on the basis of two-dimensional cross sections.34.4.5 The products of the stem's primary meristems become stem tissues 614The shoot apical meristem, like the root apical meristem, forms three primary meristems, which in turn give rise to the three tissue systems. Leaves arise from bulges called leaf primordia, which form as cells divide on the sides of shoot apical meristems, forming lateral buds. The growing stem has no cap analogous to the root cap, but the leaf primordia can act as a protective covering. The plumbing of angiosperm stems differs from that of roots. In a root, the vascular tissue lies deep in the interior, with the xylem at or near the very center. The vascular tissue of a young stem, however, is divided into discrete vascular bundles, which in eudicots generally form a cylinder but in monocots are seemingly scattered throughout a cross section of the stem. Each vascular bundle contains both xylem and phloem. The stem contains other important tissues in addition to the vascular tissues. Internal to the vascular bundles of eudicots is a storage tissue, the pith, and to the outside lies a similar storage tissue, the cortex. The cortex may contain strengthening collenchyma cells with thickened walls. The pith, the cortex, and the regions between the vascular bundles in eudicots-called pith rays-constitute the ground tissue system of the stem. The outermost cell layer of the young stem is the epidermis, the primary function of which is to minimize the loss of water from the cells within.34.4.6 Many stems and roots undergo secondary growth 615Some stems and roots remain slender and show little or no growth in diameter (secondary growth). However, in many eudicots, stems and roots thicken considerably. This thickening is of great importance and interest because it gives rise to wood and bark, and it makes the support of tall trees possible. Secondary growth results from the activity of the two lateral meristems: vascular cambium and cork cambium. Vascular cambium consists of cells that divide to produce new (secondary) xylem and phloem cells, while cork cambium produces mainly waxy-walled cork cells. Initially, the vascular cambium is a single layer of cells lying between the primary xylem and the primary phloem. The root or stem increases in diameter when the cells of the vascular cambium divide, producing secondary xylem cells toward the inside of the root or stem and producing secondary phloem cells toward the outside. In the stems of woody plants, cells of the pith rays between the vascular bundles also divide, forming a continuous cylinder of vascular cambium running the length of the stem. This cylinder in turn gives rise to complete cylinders of secondary xylem (wood) and secondary phloem from which bark will develop. As the vascular cambium produces secondary xylem and phloem, its principal cell products are vessel elements, supportive fibers, and parenchyma cells in the xylem, and sieve tube members, companion cells, fibers, and parenchyma cells in the phloem. The parenchyma cells in the xylem and phloem store carbohydrate reserves in the stem and root. Living tissues such as this storage parenchyma must be connected to the sieve tubes of the phloem, or they will starve to death. The connections are provided by vascular rays, which are composed of cells derived from the vascular cambium. The rays, laid down progressively as the cambium divides, are rows of living parenchyma cells that run perpendicular to the xylem vessels and phloem sieve tubes. As the root or stem continues to increase in diameter, new vascular rays are initiated so that this storage and transport tissue continues to meet the needs both of the bark and of the living cells in the xylem.
The vascular cambium itself increases in circumference with the growth of the root or stem. To do this, some of its cells divide in a plane at right angles to the plane that gives rise to secondary xylem and phloem. The products of each of these divisions lie within the vascular cambium itself and increase its circumference. Only eudicots have a vascular cambium and a cork cambium and thus undergo secondary growth. In the rare cases in which monocots form thickened stems-palm trees, for example-they do so without using vascular cambium or cork cambium. Palm trees have a very wide apical meristem that produces a wide stem, and dead leaf bases also add to the diameter of the stem. Basically, monocots grow in the same way as do other angiosperms that lack secondary growth. Wood and bark are unique to plants showing secondary growth. These tissues have their own patterns of organization and development. Cross sections of most tree trunks (stems) in temperate-zone forests show annual rings, which result from seasonal environmental conditions. In spring, when water is relatively plentiful, the tracheids or vessel elements produced by the vascular cambium tend to be large in diameter and thin-walled. As water becomes less available during the summer, narrower cells with thicker walls are produced, making this summer wood darker and perhaps more dense than the wood formed in spring. Thus each year is usually recorded in a tree trunk by a clearly visible annual ring consisting of one light and one dark layer. Trees in the wet tropics do not lay down such obvious regular rings. The difference between old and new regions also contributes to the appearance of wood. As a tree grows in diameter, the xylem toward the center becomes clogged with water-insoluble substances and ceases to conduct water and minerals; this is heartwood and appears darker in color. The portion of the xylem that is actively conducting all water and minerals in the tree is called sapwood and is lighter in color and more porous than heartwood. The knots that we find attractive in knotty pine but regard as a defect in structural timbers are cross sections of branches: As a trunk grows, the bases of branches become buried in the trunk's new wood and appear as knots when the trunk is cut lengthwise.bark.
As secondary growth of stems or roots continues, the expanding vascular tissue stretches and breaks the epidermis and cortex, which ultimately flake away and are lost. Tissue derived from the secondary phloem then becomes the outermost part of the stem. Before the dermal tissues are broken away, cells lying near the surface of the secondary phloem begin to divide and produce layers of cork, a tissue composed of cells with thick walls, waterproofed with suberin. The cork soon becomes the outermost tissue of the stem or root. The dividing cells, derived from the secondary phloem, form a cork cambium. Sometimes the cork cambium produces cells to the inside as well as to the outside; these cells constitute what is known as the phelloderm. Cork, cork cambium, and phelloderm make up the periderm of the secondary plant body. As the vascular cambium continues to produce secondary vascular tissue, the corky layers are in turn lost, but the continuous formation of cork cambium in the underlying phloem gives rise to new corky layers. When bark forms on stems and roots, the underlying tissues still need to release carbon dioxide and take up oxygen. Lenticels are spongy regions in the cork of stems and roots that allow such gas exchange. 34.5 Leaf Anatomy Supports Photosynthesis 617We can think of roots and stems as important supporting actors that sustain the activities of the real stars of the plant body, the leaves-the organs of photosynthesis. Leaf anatomy is beautifully adapted to carry out photosynthesis and to support photosynthesis by exchanging the gases O2 and CO2 with the environment, limiting evaporative water loss, and transporting the products of photosynthesis to the rest of the plant. A typical eudicot leaf in cross section. Most eudicot leaves have two zones of photosynthesizing parenchyma tissue referred to as mesophyll, which means "middle of the leaf." The upper layer or layers of mesophyll consist of roughly cylindrical cells. This zone is referred to as palisade mesophyll. The lower layer or layers consist of irregularly shaped cells; this zone is called spongy mesophyll. Within the mesophyll is a great deal of air space through which carbon dioxide can diffuse to surround all photosynthesizing cells. Vascular tissue branches extensively in the leaf, forming a network of veins. These veins extend to within a few cell diameters of all the cells of the leaf, ensuring that the mesophyll cells are well supplied with water and mineral nutrients. The products of photosynthesis are loaded into the phloem of the veins for export to the rest of the plant. Covering the entire leaf is a layer of nonphotosynthetic cells constituting the epidermis. The epidermal cells have an overlying waxy cuticle that is highly impermeable to water. But this impermeability poses a problem: While keeping water in the leaf, the epidermis also keeps carbon dioxide, the other raw material of photosynthesis, out. The problem of balancing water retention and carbon dioxide availability is solved by an elegant regulatory system that will be discussed in more detail in the next chapter. Guard cells are modified epidermal cells that change their shape, thereby opening or closing pores called stomata, which serve as passageways between the environment and the leaf's interior. When the stomata are open, carbon dioxide can enter and oxygen can leave, but some water can also be lost.
In Chapter 8 we described C4 plants, which can fix carbon dioxide efficiently even when the carbon dioxide supply in the leaf decreases to a level at which the photosynthesis of C3 plants is inefficient. One adaptation that helps C4 plants do this is their modified leaf anatomy. Notice that the photosynthetic cells in the C4 leaf are grouped around the veins in concentric layers, forming an outer mesophyll layer and an inner bundle sheath. These layers each contain different types of chloroplasts, leading to the biochemical division of labor described in Chapter 8. Leaves receive water and mineral nutrients from the roots by way of the stems. In return, the leaves export products of photosynthesis, providing a supply of chemical energy to the rest of the plant body. And, as we have just seen, leaves exchange gases, including water vapor, with the environment by way of the stomata. All three of these processes will be considered in detail in the next chapter.
35 Transport in PlantsAbout 40 years ago the biologist Per Scholander was studying water movement to the top of an 80-meter Douglas fir. To collect samples rapidly from the treetop, he hired a sharpshooter, who aimed a high-powered rifle at a twig high in the tree and fired. From high above, a twig fluttered to the ground, and Scholander quickly inserted it into an instrument for measuring tension in the xylem sap. As we will soon see, Scholander's measurements increased our understanding of how water and minerals reach the tops of tall trees.The water and minerals in a plant's xylem must be transported to the entire shoot system, all the way to the highest leaves and apical buds. Carbohydrates produced in all the leaves, including the highest, must be translocated to all the living nonphotosynthetic parts of the plant. Before we consider the mechanisms underlying these processes, we should consider two questions: How much water is transported? And how high can water be transported? In answer to the first question, consider the following example: A single maple tree 15 meters tall was estimated to have some 177,000 leaves, with a total leaf surface area of 675 square meters-half again the area of a basketball court. During a summer day, that tree lost 220 liters of water per hour to the atmosphere by evaporation from the leaves. To prevent wilting, the xylem needed to transport 220 liters of water from the roots to the leaves every hour. (By comparison, a 50-gallon drum holds 189 liters.) The second question can be rephrased: How tall are the tallest trees? The tallest gymnosperms, the coast redwoods-Sequoia sempervirens-exceed 110 meters in height, as do the tallest angiosperms, the Australian Eucalyptus regnans. Any successful explanation of water transport in the xylem must account for transport to these great heights. In this chapter we consider the uptake and transport of water and minerals by plants, the control of evaporative water loss through the stomata, and the translocation of substances in the phloem. 35.1 Uptake and Transport of Water and Minerals 620Terrestrial plants obtain both water and mineral nutrients from the soil, usually by way of their roots. You already know that water is one of the ingredients required for carbohydrate production by photosynthesis in the leaves. Water is also essential for transporting solutes, for cooling the plant, and for developing the internal pressure that supports the plant body.How do leaves high in a tree obtain water from the soil? What are the mechanisms by which water and mineral ions enter the plant body through the roots and ascend as sap in the xylem? Because neither water nor minerals can move through the plant into the xylem without crossing at least one plasma membrane, we focus first on osmosis. Then we examine the uptake of mineral ions, and follow the pathway by which both water and minerals move through the root to gain entry to the xylem.35.1.1 Water moves through a membrane by osmosis 621Osmosis, the movement of water through a membrane in accordance with the laws of diffusion, was described in Chapter 5. The solute potential (osmotic potential) of a solution is a measure of the effect of dissolved solutes on the osmotic behavior of the solution. The greater the solute concentration of a solution, the more negative its solute potential, and the greater the tendency of water to move into it from another solution of lower solute concentration (and less negative solute potential). For osmosis to occur, the two solutions must be separated by a membrane permeable to water but relatively impermeable to the solute. Recall, too, that osmosis is a passive process-energy is not required. Unlike animal cells, plant cells are surrounded by a relatively rigid cell wall. As water enters a plant cell, the entry of more water is increasingly resisted by an opposing pressure potential ( turgor pressure ), owing to the rigidity of the wall. As more and more water enters, the pressure potential becomes greater and greater. Pressure potential is a hydraulic pressure analogous to the air pressure in an automobile tire; it is a real pressure that can be measured with a pressure gauge. Cells with walls do not burst when placed in pure water; instead, water enters by osmosis until the pressure potential exactly balances the solute potential. At this point, the cell is turgid; that is, it has a high pressure potential. The overall tendency of a solution to take up water from pure water, across a membrane, is called its water potential, represented as ?, the Greek letter psi. The water potential is simply the sum of the (negative) solute potential (?s) and the (usually positive) pressure potential (?p): ? = ?s + ?p. For pure water under no applied pressure, all three of these parameters are zero.We can measure solute potential, pressure potential, and water potential in megapascals (MPa), a unit of pressure. (Atmospheric pressure is about 0.1 MPa, or 14.7 pounds per square inch; typical pressure in an automobile tire is about 0.2 MPa.) In all cases in which water moves between two solutions separated by a membrane, the following rule of osmosis applies: Water always moves across a differentially permeable membrane toward the region of more negative water potential. Osmotic phenomena are of great importance to plants. The structure of many plants is maintained by the pressure potential of their cells; if the pressure potential is lost, a plant wilts. Within living tissues, the movement of water from cell to cell by osmosis follows a gradient of water potential. Over longer distances, in open tubes such as xylem vessels and phloem sieve tubes, the flow of water and dissolved solutes is driven by a gradient in pressure potential. The movement of a solution due to a difference in pressure potential between two parts of a plant is called bulk flow.35.1.2 Uptake of mineral ions requires transport proteins 621Mineral ions, which carry electric charges, cannot move across a plasma membrane unless they are aided by transport proteins. (You may wish to review the description of transport proteins in Chapter 5.) When the concentration of these charged ions in the soil is greater than that in the plant, ion channels and carrier proteins can move them into the plant by facilitated diffusion. The concentrations of some ions in the soil solution, however, are lower than those required inside the plant. Thus the plant must take up these ions against a concentration gradient. Electric potential also plays a role in this process: To move a negatively charged ion into a negatively charged region is to move it against an electrical gradient. The combination of concentration and electrical gradients is called an electrochemical gradient. Uptake against an electrochemical gradient is active transport, an energy-requiring process, depending on cellular respiration for ATP. Active transport, of course, requires specific carrier proteins. Unlike animals, plants do not have a sodium-potassium pump for active transport. Rather, plants have a proton pump, which uses energy obtained from ATP to move protons out of the cell against a proton concentration gradient. Because protons (H+) are positively charged, their accumulation on one side of a membrane has two results: The region outside the membrane becomes positively charged with respect to the region inside; a proton concentration gradient develops.Each of these results has consequences for the movement of other ions. Because of the charge difference across the membrane, the movement of positively charged ions, such as potassium (K+), into the cell through their membrane channels is enhanced. These positive ions move into the now more negatively charged interior of the cell by facilitated diffusion. In addition, the proton concentration gradient can be harnessed to drive secondary active transport, in which negatively charged ions such as chloride (Cl-)are moved into the cell against an electrochemical gradient by a symport protein that couples their movement with that of H+. In sum, there is vigorous traffic of ions across plant membranes. The proton pump and the coordinated activities of other membrane transport proteins cause the interior of a plant cell to be strongly negative with respect to the exterior. Such a difference in charge across a membrane is called a membrane potential. Biologists can measure the membrane potential of a plant cell with microelectrodes, just as they can measure similar charge differences in neurons (nerve cells) and other animal cells. Most plant cells have a membrane potential of at least -120 millivolts, and theymaintain it at this level. The membrane potential difference affects the movements of mineral ions into and out of cells.35.1.3 Water and ions pass to the xylem by way of the apoplast and symplast 622Mineral ions enter and move through plants in various ways. Where bulk flow of water is occurring, dissolved minerals are carried along in the stream. Where water is moving more slowly, minerals move by diffusion. At certain points, where plasma membranes are being crossed, some mineral ions are moved by active transport. One such point is the surface of a root hair, where mineral ions first enter the cells of the plant. Later, within the stele, the ions must cross a plasma membrane before entering the lifeless cells of the xylem. The movement of ions across membranes can also result in the movement of water. Water moves into a root because the root has a more negative water potential than does the soil solution. It moves from the cortex of the root into the stele (where the vascular tissues are located) because the stele has a more negative water potential than does the cortex. Water and minerals from the soil may pass through the dermal and ground tissues to the stele via two pathways: the apoplast and the symplast. Plant cells are surrounded by cell walls that lie outside the plasma membrane, and intercellular spaces (spaces between cells) are common in many tissues. The walls and intercellular spaces together constitute the apoplast (from the Greek for "away from living material"). The apoplast is a continuous meshwork through which water and dissolved substances can flow or diffuse without ever having to cross a membrane. Movement of materials through the apoplast is thus unregulated.
The remainder of the plant body is the symplast (from the Greek for "together with living material"). The symplast is the portion of the plant body enclosed by membranes-the continuous cytoplasm of the living cells, connected by plasmodesmata. The selectively permeable plasma membranes of the cells control access to the symplast, so movement of water and dissolved substances into the symplast is tightly regulated. Water and minerals can pass from the soil solution through the apoplast as far as the endodermis, the innermost layer of the cortex. The endodermis is distinguished from the rest of the ground tissue by the presence of Casparian strips. These waxy, suberin-containing structures impregnate the endodermal cell wall and form a belt surrounding the endodermal cells. The Casparian strips act as a gasket that prevents water and ions from moving between the cells. The Casparian strips of the endodermis thus completely separate the apoplast of the cortex from the apoplast of the stele. They do not obstruct the outer or inner faces of the endodermal cells. Accordingly, water and ions can enter the stele only by way of the symplast-that is, by entering and passing through the cytoplasm of the endodermal cells. Thus transport proteins in the membranes of these cells determine which mineral ions pass into the stele, and at what rates. This is one of several ways in which plants regulate their chemical composition and ensure an appropriate balance of their constituents. This balance is essential to plant life.Once they have passed the endodermal barrier, water and minerals leave the symplast. Parenchyma cells in the pericycle or xylem help mineral ions move back into the apoplast. Some of these parenchyma cells, called transfer cells, are structurally modified for transporting mineral ions from their cytoplasm (part of the symplast) into their cell walls (part of the apoplast). The wall that receives the transported ions has many knobby extensions projecting into the transfer cell, increasing the surface area of the plasma membrane, the number of transport proteins, and thus the rate of transport. Transfer cells also have many mitochondria that produce the ATP needed to power the active transport of mineral ions. As mineral ions move into the solution in the walls, the water potential of the wall solution (apoplast) becomes more negative; thus water moves out of the cells and into the apoplast by osmosis. Active transport of ions moves the ions directly, and water follows passively. The end result is that water and minerals end up in the xylem, where they constitute the xylem sap. We have just seen that proteins regulate the movement of ions across membranes. We shall now see that even water movement itself is regulated by proteins.35.1.4 Aquaporins control the rate, but not the direction, of water movement 624Aquaporins are membrane channel proteins through which water can traverse a membrane without interacting with the hydrophobic environment of its phospholipid bilayer. These proteins, important in both plants and animals, allow water to move rapidly from environment to cell and from cell to cell. The permeability of some aquaporins is subject to regulation, changing the rate of osmosis across the membrane. However, water movement through aquaporins is always passive, so the direction of water movement is unchanged by alterations in aquaporin permeability. 35.2 Transport of Water and Minerals in the Xylem 624So far in this chapter we've described the movement of water and minerals into plant roots and their entry into the root xylem. Now we will consider how xylem sap moves throughout the remainder of the plant. Let's first consider some early ideas about the ascent of sap and then turn to our current understanding of how it works. Well describe the experiments that ruled out some early models as well as some evidence in support of the current model-and we'll find out what Per Scholander's sharpshooter was up to in the story that opened this chapter.35.2.1 Experiments ruled out some early models of transport in the xylem 624Some of the earliest attempts to explain the rise of sap in the xylem were based on a hypothetical pumping action by living cells in the stem, which pushed the sap upward. However, experiments conducted and published in 1893 by the German botanist Eduard Strasburger definitively ruled out such models. Strasburger worked with trees about 20 meters tall. He sawed them through at their bases and plunged the cut ends into buckets containing solutions of poisons such as picric acid. The solutions rose through the trunks, as was readily evident from the progressive death of the bark higher and higher up. When the solutions reached the leaves, the leaves died, too, at which point the solutions stopped being transported (as shown by the liquid levels in the buckets, which stopped dropping). This simple experiment established three important points: Living, "pumping" cells were not responsible for the upward movement of the solutions, because the solutions themselves killed all living cells with which they came in contact; The leaves play a crucial role in transport. As long as they were alive, the solutions continued to be transported upward; when the leaves died, transport ceased; Transport was not caused by the roots, because the trunks had been completely separated from the roots.35.2.2 Root pressure does not account for xylem transport 624In spite of Strasburger's observations, some plant physiologists turned to a model of transport based on root pressure-pressure exerted by the root tissues that would force liquid up the xylem. The basis for root pressure is a higher solute concentration, and accordingly a more negative water potential, in the xylem sap than in the soil solution. This negative potential draws water into the stele; once there, the water has nowhere to go but up. There is good evidence for root pressure-for example, the phenomenon of guttation, in which liquid water is forced out through openings in the leaves. Guttation occurs only under conditions of high atmospheric humidity and plentiful water in the soil, which occur most commonly at night. Root pressure is also the source of the sap that oozes from the cut stumps of some plants, such as Coleus, when their tops are removed. Root pressure, however, cannot account for the ascent of sap in trees. Root pressure seldom exceeds 0.1-0.2 MPa (one or two times atmospheric pressure). If root pressure were driving sap up the xylem, we would observe a positive pressure potential in the xylem at all times. In fact, as we are about to see, the xylem sap is under tension-a negative pressure potential-when it is ascending. Furthermore, as Strasburger had already shown, materials can be transported upward in the xylem even when the roots have been removed. If the roots aren't pushing the xylem sap upward, what does cause it to rise?35.2.3 The transpiration-cohesion-tension mechanism accounts for xylem transport 625The obvious alternative to pushing is pulling: The leaves pull the xylem sap upward. Transpiration, the evaporative loss of water from the leaves, generates a pulling force (tension) on the water in the apoplast of the leaves. Hydrogen bonding between water molecules makes the sap in the xylem cohesive enough to withstand the tension and rise by bulk flow. Let's see how this transpiration-cohesion-tension mechanism works. We'll start with transpiration. Water vapor diffuses from the intercellular spaces of the leaf, by way of the stomata, to the outside air because the water vapor concentration is greater inside the leaf than outside. Where did this water vapor come from? As water vapor diffuses out of the leaf, more water evaporates from the moist walls of the mesophyll cells. Evaporation of water from the thin film surrounding the cell wall causes the film to shrink into the cellulose meshwork of the wall. The surface of the film curves where the water retreats into microscopic pores. The surface tension of the curved surfaces generates a tension-a negative pressure potential, a pull-in the film. The tension increases as more water leaves the film. This tension is what causes the bulk flow of water all the way from the roots. The tension in the mesophyll draws water from the vessels or tracheids in the xylem of the nearest vein. The water, with its dissolved solutes, moves by bulk flow through the apoplast. The removal of water from the xylem of the veins establishes tension on the entire column of water contained within the xylem, so the column is drawn upward all the way from the roots.The ability of water to be pulled upward through tiny tubes results from the remarkable cohesiveness of water-the tendency of water molecules to cohere to one another through hydrogen bonding. The narrower the tube, the greater the tension the water column can withstand without breaking. The integrity of the column is also maintained by the adhesion of water to the cell walls. In the tallest trees, such as a 100-meter redwood, the difference in pressure potential between the top and the bottom of the column may be as great as 3 MPa. The cohesiveness of water in the xylem is great enough to withstand even that great a tension. In summary, the key elements of water transport in the xylem are: transpiration, followed by evaporation from the moist cell walls in the leaves, resulting in tension in the remainder of the xylem's water owing to the cohesion of water, which pulls up more water to replace water that has been lost.These elements require no work-no expenditure of energy-on the part of the plant. At each step between soil and atmosphere, water moves passively to a region with a more strongly negative water potential. Dry air has the most negative water potential (-95 MPa at 50% relative humidity), and the soil solution has the least negative water potential (between -0.01 and -3 MPa). Xylem sap has a water potential more negative than that of cells in the root, but less negative than that of mesophyll cells in the leaf. Mineral ions contained in the xylem sap rise passively with the solution as it ascends from root to leaf. In this way the nutritional needs of the shoot are met. Some of the mineral elements brought to the leaves are subsequently redistributed to other parts of the plant by way of the phloem, but the initial delivery from the roots is through the xylem. In addition to promoting the transport of minerals, transpiration contributes to temperature regulation. As water evaporates from mesophyll cells, heat is taken up from the cells, and the leaf temperature drops. This cooling effect is important in enabling plants to live in hot environments. A farmer can hold a leaf between thumb and forefinger to estimate its temperature; if the leaf doesn't feel cool, that means that transpiration is not occurring, so it must be time to water.35.2.4 A pressure bomb measures tension in the xylem sap 626The evaporation-cohesion-tension model can be true only if the column of sap in the xylem is under tension (negative pressure potential). The most elegant demonstrations of this tension, and of its adequacy to account for the ascent of sap in tall trees, were performed by Per Scholander. He measured tension in stems with an instrument called a pressure bomb. The principle of the pressure bomb is as follows: Consider a stem in which the xylem sap is under tension. If the stem is cut, the sap pulls away from the cut, into the stem. Now the stem is placed in a device called a pressure bomb, in which the pressure may be raised. The cut surface remains outside the bomb. As pressure is applied to the plant parts within the bomb, the xylem sap is forced back to the cut surface. When the sap first becomes visible again at the cut surface, the pressure in the bomb is recorded. This pressure is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to the tension (negative pressure potential) originally present in the xylem.Scholander used the pressure bomb to study dozens of plant species, from diverse habitats, growing under a variety of conditions. In all cases in which xylem sap was ascending, it was found to be under tension. The tension disappeared in some of the plants at night, when transpiration ceased. In developing vines, the xylem sap was under no tension until leaves formed. Once leaves developed, transport in the xylem began, and tensions were recorded. Suppose you wanted to measure tensions in the xylem at various heights in a large tree, to confirm that the tensions are sufficient to account for the rate at which sap is moving up the trunk. How would you obtain stem samples for measurement? Scholander used surveying instruments to determine the heights of particular twigs and then had a sharpshooter shoot the twigs from the tree with a high-powered rifle. As quickly as the twigs fell to the ground, Scholander inserted them in the pressure bomb and recorded their xylem tension. In every case, the differences in tensions at different heights were great enough to keep the xylem sap ascending. Although transpiration provides the impetus for transport of water and minerals in the xylem, it also results in the loss of tremendous quantities of water from the plant. How do plants control this loss? 35.3 Transpiration and the Stomata 627The epidermis of leaves and stems minimizes transpirational water loss by secreting a waxy cuticle, which is impermeable to water. However, the cuticle is also impermeable to carbon dioxide. This poses a problem: How can the leaf balance its need to retain water with its need to obtain carbon dioxide for photosynthesis? Plants have evolved an elegant compromise in the form of stomata (singular stoma), or gaps, in the epidermis. A pair of specialized epidermal cells called guard cells controls the opening and closing of each stoma. When the stomata are open, carbon dioxide can enter the leaf by diffusion, but water vapor is also lost in the same way. Closed stomata prevent water loss, but also exclude carbon dioxide from the leaf. Most plants open their stomata only when the light intensity is sufficient to maintain a moderate rate of photosynthesis. At night, when darkness precludes photosynthesis, the stomata remain closed; no carbon dioxide is needed at this time, and water is conserved. Even during the day, the stomata close if water is being lost at too great a rate. The stoma and guard cells are typical of eudicots. Monocots typically have specialized epidermal cells associated with their guard cells. The principle of operation, however, is the same for both monocot and eudicot stomata. In what follows, we describe the regulation and mechanism of stomatal opening, the normal cycle of opening and closing, and the modified cycle used by some plants that live in dry or saline environments.35.3.1 The guard cells control the size of the stomatal opening 627Light causes the stomata of most plants to open, admitting carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. Another cue for stomatal opening is the level of carbon dioxide in the spaces inside the leaf. A low level favors opening of the stomata, thus allowing the uptake of more carbon dioxide. Water stress is a common problem for plants, especially on hot, sunny, windy days. Plants have a protective response to these conditions, using the water potential of the mesophyll cells as a cue. Even when the carbon dioxide level is low and the sun is shining, if the mesophyll is too dehydrated-that is, if the water potential of the mesophyll is too negative-the mesophyll cells release a plant hormone called abscisic acid. Abscisic acid acts on the guard cells, causing them to close the stomata and prevent further drying of the leaf. This response reduces the rate of photosynthesis, but it protects the plant. What drives the opening and closing of the stomata? Certain wavelengths of blue light, absorbed by a pigment in the guard cell plasma membrane, activate a proton pump, which actively transports protons (H+) out of the guard cells and into the surrounding epidermis. The resulting proton gradient drives the accumulation of potassium ions (K+) in the guard cell.The increasing internal concentration of potassium ions makes the water potential of the guard cell more negative. Water enters the guard cells by osmosis, increasing their pressure potential. Their cell walls contain cellulose microfibrils that cause the cells to respond to this increase by changing their shapes so that a gap-the stoma-appears between them. The stoma closes by the reverse process when the proton pump is no longer active. Potassium ions diffuse passively out of the guard cells, water follows by osmosis, the pressure potential decreases, and the guard cells sag together and seal off the stoma. Negatively charged chloride ions and organic ions also move out of the guard cells with the potassium ions, maintaining electrical balance and contributing to the change in the solute potential of the guard cells.35.3.2 Antitranspirants decrease water loss 628Stomata are the referees of a compromise between the admission of CO2 for photosynthesis and the loss of water by transpiration. Farmers would like their crops to transpire less, thus reducing the need for irrigation. Similarly, nurseries and gardeners would like to be able to reduce the amount of water lost by plants that are to be transplanted, because transplanting often damages the roots, causing the plant to wilt or die. What we need is a good antitranspirant: a compound that can be applied to plants, reducing water loss from the stomata without producing disastrous side effects by excessively limiting carbon dioxide uptake. Abscisic acid and its commercial chemical analogs have been found to work as antitranspirants in small-scale tests, but their high cost has precluded commercial use. What about making plants more sensitive to their own abscisic acid? The guard cells of plants with a genetic mutation called era are highly sensitive to abscisic acid. These plants are resistant to wilting during drought stress. A totally different type of antitranspirant seals off the leaves from the atmosphere for a time. Growers use a variety of compounds, most of which form polymeric films around leaves, to form a barrier to evaporation. These compounds cause undesirable side effects, however, and can be used only for relatively short periods of time. Their most common use is in the transplanting of nursery stock.35.3.3 Crassulacean acid metabolism correlates with an inverted stomatal cycle 628Most plants open and close their stomata on a schedule. The stomata are typically open for much of the day and closed at night. (They may also close during very hot days to reduce water loss.) But not all plants follow this pattern. Many plants that live in dry areas or near the ocean have some unusual biochemical and behavioral features. One particularly surprising feature is their "backward" stomatal cycle: Their stomata are open at night and closed by day. This behavior is part of the phenomenon of crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), which was described in Chapter 8. At night, while the stomata are open, carbon dioxide diffuses freely into the leaves of CAM plants and reacts in the mesophyll cells with phosphoenolpyruvic acid to produce organic acids. These acids accumulate to high concentrations. At daybreak the stomata close. Throughout the day, the organic acids are broken down to release the carbon dioxide they contain-behind closed stomata. Because the carbon dioxide cannot diffuse out of the plant, it is available for photosynthesis. CAM is well adapted to environments where water is scarce: A leaf with its stomata open only at night-when the environment is cooler-loses much less water than does a leaf with its stomata open by day. In both CAM and non-CAM plants, carbon dioxide is fixed and converted to the products of photosynthesis. How are these products delivered to other parts of the plant? 35.4 Translocation of Substances in the Phloem 628Substances in the phloem move from sources to sinks. A source is an organ (such as a mature leaf or a storage root) that produces (by photosynthesis or by digestion of stored reserves) more sugars than it requires. A sink is an organ (such as a root, a flower, a developing tuber, or an immature leaf) that does not make enough sugar for its own growth and storage needs. Sugars (primarily sucrose), amino acids, some minerals, and a variety of other substances are translocated between sources and sinks in the phloem. How do we know that such organic solutes are translocated in the phloem, rather than in the xylem? Just over 300 years ago, the Italian scientist Marcello Malpighi performed a classic experiment in which he removed a ring of bark (containing the phloem) from the trunk of a tree-that is, he girdled the tree. The bark in the region above the girdle swelled over time. We now know that the swelling resulted from the accumulation of organic solutes that came from higher up the tree and could no longer continue downward because of the disruption of the phloem. Later, the bark below the girdle died because it no longer received sugars from the leaves. Any model to explain translocation of organic solutes must account for a few important facts: Translocation stops if the phloem tissue is killed by heating or other methods; thus the mechanism must be different from that of transport in the xylem; Translocation often proceeds in both directions-up and down the stem-simultaneously; Translocation is inhibited by compounds that inhibit respiration and thus limit the ATP supply in the source.To investigate translocation, plant physiologists needed to obtain samples of pure sieve tube sap from individual sieve tube members. This difficult task was simplified when scientists discovered that a common garden pest, the aphid, feeds by drilling into a sieve tube. An aphid inserts its stylet, or feeding organ, into a stem until the stylet enters a sieve tube. Within the sieve tube, the pressure is much greater than in the surrounding plant tissues, so nutritious sieve tube sap is forced up the stylet and into the aphid's digestive tract. So great is the pressure that sugary liquid is forced through the insect's body and out the anus. Plant physiologists use aphids to collect sieve tube sap. When liquid appears on the aphid's abdomen, indicating that the insect has connected with a sieve tube, the physiologist quickly freezes the aphid and cuts its body away from the stylet, which remains in the sieve tube member. For hours, sieve tube sap continues to exude from the cut stylet, where it may be collected for analysis. Chemical analysis of sieve tube sap collected in this manner reveals the contents of a single sieve tube member over time. We can also infer the rates at which different substances are translocated by measuring how long it takes for radioactivie tracers administered to a leaf to appear at stylets at different distances from the leaf. These methods have allowed us to understand how, at times, different substances might move in opposite directions in the phloem of a stem. Experiments with aphid stylets have shown that all the contents of any given sieve tube member move in the same direction. Thus, bidirectional translocation can be understood in terms of different sieve tubes conducting sap in opposite directions. Data obtained by these and other means led to the general adoption of the pressure flow model as an explanation for translocation in the phloem.35.4.1 The pressure flow model appears to account for phloem ~ translocation 630The tonoplast breaks down during sieve tube member development, allowing the contents of the central vacuole to combine with much of the cytosol to form the sieve tube sap (see Chapter 34). The sap flows, under pressure, through the sieve tubes. It moves from one sieve tube member to the next by bulk flow through the sieve plates, without crossing a membrane. Two steps in sieve tube sap flow require metabolic energy: Transport of sucrose and other solutes into the sieve tubes (loading) at sources; Removal (unloading) of the solutes where the sieve tubes enter sinks. According to the pressure flow model of translocation in the phloem, sucrose is actively transported into sieve tube members at sources, giving these cells a much greater sucrose concentration than surrounding cells. Water therefore enters the sieve tube members by osmosis. The entry of this water causes a greater pressure potential at the source end, so the entire fluid content of the sieve tube is pushed toward the sink end of the tube-that is, the sap moves by bulk flow. The pressure flow model of translocation in the phloem is contrasted with the transpiration-cohesion-tension model of xylem transport.35.4.2 Testing the pressure flow model 630The pressure flow model was first proposed more than half a century ago, but some of its features are still debated. Other mechanisms have been proposed to account for translocation in sieve tubes. Some have been disproved, and none of the rest have been supported by a weight of evidence comparable to that for the pressure flow model, which must meet two requirements: The sieve plates must be open, so that bulk flow from one sieve tube member to the next is possible; There must be an effective method for loading sucrose and other solutes into the phloem in source tissues and removing them in sink tissues. Let us see whether these requirements are met. Early electron microscopic studies of phloem samples cut from plants produced results that seemed to contradict the pressure flow model. The pores in the sieve plates always appeared to be plugged with masses of a fibrous protein, suggesting that sieve tube sap could not flow freely. But what is the function of that fibrous protein? One possibility is that this protein is usually distributed more or less at random throughout the sieve tube members until the sieve tube is damaged; then the sudden surge of sap toward the cut surface carries the protein into the pores, blocking them and preventing the loss of valuable nutrients. In other words, perhaps the protein does not block the pores unless the phloem is damaged. How might this possibility be tested? Could we obtain phloem for microscopic observation without causing the sap to surge to the cut surface?One way to prevent the surge of the sap is to freeze plant tissue before cutting it. Another way is to let the tissue wilt so that there is no pressure in the phloem before cutting. When these methods were used, the sieve plates were not clogged by the protein. Thus, the first condition of the pressure flow model is met. If the pressure flow model is correct, there must be mechanisms for loading sugars and other solutes into the phloem in source regions and for unloading them in sink regions. One pathway of phloem loading has been demonstrated in some plant species. Sugars and other solutes pass from cell to cell through the symplast in the mesophyll. When these substances reach cells adjacent to the ends of leaf veins, they leave the mesophyll cells and enter the apoplast, sometimes with the help of transfer cells. Then specific sugars and amino acids are actively transported into cells of the phloem, thus reentering the symplast. Passage through the apoplast and back into the symplast selects substances to be accumulated for translocation because substances can enter the phloem only after passing through a differentially permeable membrane. In many plants, solutes reenter the symplast at the companion cells (see Chapter 34), which then transfer the solutes to the adjacent sieve tube members. In other plant species, sucrose or other sugars move from the mesophyll to the sieve tube members entirely within the symplast; that is, transfer of solutes from symplast to apoplast and back again is not a universal feature of phloem loading.A form of secondary active transport (see Chapter 5, pages 88-90) loads sucrose into the companion cells and sieve tube members. Sucrose is carried through the plasma membrane from apoplast to symplast by  sucrose-proton symport; thus the entry of sucrose and of protons is strictly coupled. For this symport to work, the apoplast must have a high concentration of protons; the protons are supplied by a primary active transport system, the proton pump. The protons then diffuse back into the cell through the symport protein, bringing sucrose with them. In sink regions, the solutes are actively transported out of the sieve tube members and into the surrounding tissues. This unloading serves two purposes: It helps maintain the gradient of solute potential and hence of pressure potential in the sieve tubes, and it promotes the buildup of sugars and starch to high concentrations in storage regions, such as developing fruits and seeds.35.4.3 Plasmodesmata and material transfer between cells 632Many substances move from cell to cell within the symplast by way of plasmodesmata. Among their other roles, plasmodesmata participate in the loading and unloading of sieve tube members. Mechanisms vary among plant species, but the story in tobacco plants is a common one. In tobacco, sugars and other compounds in source tissues enter companion cells by active transport from the apoplast and move on to the sieve tube members through plasmodesmata. In sink tissues, plasmodesmata connect sieve tube members, companion cells, and the cells that will receive and use the transported compounds. Plasmodesmata undergo developmental changes as an immature sink leaf matures into a mature source leaf. Plasmodesmata in sink tissues favor rapid unloading: They are more abundant, and they allow the passage of larger molecules. Plasmodesmata in source tissues are few in number. It was long thought that only substances with molecular weights less than 1,000 could fit through a plasmodesma. Then biologists discovered that cells infected with tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) could allow molecules with molecular weights of as much as 20,000 to exit. We now know that TMV encodes a "movement protein" that produces this change in the permeability of the plasmodesmata-and that plants themselves normally produce at least one such movement protein. Even large molecules such as proteins and RNAs, with molecular weights up to at least 50,000, can thus move between living plant cells. We will see some consequences of this movement of macromolecules through plasmodesmata in later chapters. Biologists are exploring possible ways to regulate the permeability, number, and form of plasmodesmata as a means of modifying traffic in the plant. Such modifications might, for example, allow the diversion of more of a grain crop's photosynthetic products into the grain, increasing the crop yield.36 Plant NutritionAn insect has stepped on a trigger hair on the leaf of a Venus flytrap-a big mistake for the insect. The trigger hair sends an electrical signal that springs a mechanical trap. The two halves of the leaves close, and spiny outgrowths at the margins of the leaves interlock to imprison the insect. The leaf secretes enzymes that will digest its prey. The leaf then absorbs the products of digestion, especially amino acids, and uses them as a nutritional supplement. Why does the Venus flytrap go to all this trouble? Few other plants are carnivorous-your petunia plant is not stalking you, after all. But the Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) lives on soils in which nitrogen is scarce. Its carnivorous adaptation gives it another way to obtain needed nitrogen. Why do plants need nitrogen? The answer is simple if we recall the chemical structures of proteins and nucleic acids that we looked at in Chapter 3. These vital components of all living things contain nitrogen, as do chlorophyll and many other important biochemical compounds. If a plant cannot get enough nitrogen, it cannot synthesize these compounds at a rate adequate to keep itself healthy. In addition to nitrogen, plants need other materials from their environment. In this chapter we explore the differences between the basic strategies of plants and animals for obtaining nutrition. Then we look at what nutrients plants require, and how they acquire them. Because most nutrients come from the soil, we discuss the formation of soils and the effects of plants on soils. As any farmer can tell you, nitrogen is the nutrient that most often limits plant growth, so we devote a section specifically to nitrogen metabolism in plants. The chapter concludes with a look at plants that use means other than photosynthesis to supplement their nutrition. 36.1 The Acquisition of Nutrients 634Every living thing must obtain raw materials from its environment. These nutrients include the major ingredients of macromolecules: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. Carbon and oxygen enter the living world through the carbon-fixing reactions of photosynthesis, in which photosynthetic organisms obtain them from atmospheric carbon dioxide. Hydrogen enters living systems through the light reactions of photosynthesis, which split water. For carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, photosynthesis is the gateway to the living world. The movement of nitrogen into organisms begins with processing by some highly specialized bacteria living in the soil. Some of these bacteria act on nitrogen gas, converting it into a form usable by plants. The plants, in turn, provide organic nitrogen and carbon to animals, fungi, and many microorganisms. In addition to carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, other mineral nutrients are essential to living systems. The proteins of organisms contain sulfur (S), and their nucleic acids contain phosphorus (P). There is magnesium (Mg) in chlorophyll, and iron (Fe) in many important compounds, such as the cytochromes. Within the soil, these and other minerals dissolve in water, forming a solution-called the soil solution-that contacts the roots of plants. Plants take up most of these mineral nutrients from the soil solution in ionic form.36.1.2 Autotrophs make their own organic compounds 635The plants provide carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and sulfur to most of the rest of the living world. Plants, some protists, and some bacteria are autotrophs; that is, they make their own organic compounds from simple inorganic nutrients-carbon dioxide, water, nitrate or ammonium ions containing nitrogen, and a few other soluble mineral nutrients. Heterotrophs are organisms that require preformed organic compounds (compounds that contain carbon) as food. Herbivores and carnivores are heterotrophs that depend directly or indirectly on autotrophs as their source of nutrition. Most autotrophs are photosynthesizers-that is, they use light as the source of energy for synthesizing organic compounds from inorganic raw materials. Some autotrophs, however, are chemosynthesizers, deriving their energy not from light, but from reduced inorganic substances, such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S), in their environment. All chemosynthesizers are bacteria. Some chemosynthetic bacteria in the soil contribute to the nutrition of plants by increasing the availability of nitrogen and sulfur. But how does a plant obtain its nutrients, whether they come with or without bacterial action?36.1.3 How does a stationary organism find nutrients? 635An organism that cannot move must exploit energy that is somehow brought to it. Most sessile animals depend primarily on the movement of water to bring energy, in the form of food, to them, but a plant's supply of energy arrives at the speed of light from the sun. A plant's supply of nutrients, however, is strictly local, and the plant may use up the water and mineral nutrients in its local environment as it develops. How does a plant cope with such a problem? One answer is to extend itself by growing into new resources. Growth is a plant's version of locomotion. Root systems mine the soil; by growing, they reach new sources of mineral nutrients and water. Growth of leaves helps a plant secure light and carbon dioxide. A plant may compete with other plants for light by outgrowing them, both capturing more light for itself and preventing the growth of its neighbors by shading them. As it grows, a plant-or even a single root-must deal with environmental heterogeneity. Animal droppings create high local concentrations of nitrogen. A particle of calcium carbonate in the soil may make a tiny area alkaline, while dead organic matter may make a nearby area acidic. 36.2 Mineral Nutrients Essential to Plants 635What important mineral nutrients do plants take up from their environment, and what are their roles? Except for nitrogen, they all come from the soil solution and derive ultimately from rock.There are three criteria for calling something an essential element: The element must be necessary for normal growth and reproduction; The element cannot be replaceable by another element; The requirement must be direct-that is, not the result of an indirect effect, such as the need to relieve toxicity caused by another substance. In this section, we'll consider the symptoms of particular mineral deficiencies, the roles of some of the mineral nutrients, and the technique by which the essential elements for plants were identified. The essential elements in Table 36_1 are divided into two categories: the macronutrients and the micronutrients. Plant tissues need macronutrients in concentrations of at least 1 gram per kilogram of their dry matter, and they need micronutrients in concentrations of less than 100 milligrams per kilogram of their dry matter. (Dry matter, or dry weight, is what remains after all the water has been removed from a tissue sample.) Both the macronutrients and the micronutrients are essential for the plant to complete its life cycle from seed to seed.36.2.1. Deficiency symptoms reveal inadequate nutrition 635Before a plant that is deficient in an essential element dies, it usually displays characteristic deficiency symptoms. Table 36.2 describes the symptoms of some common mineral deficiencies. Such symptoms help horticulturists diagnose mineral nutrient deficiencies in plants. Nitrogen deficiency is the most common mineral deficiency in plants. Plants in natural environments are almost always deficient in nitrogen, but they seldom display deficiency symptoms. Instead, their growth slows to match the available supply of nitrogen. Crop plants, on the other hand, show deficiency symptoms if a formerly abundant supply of nitrogen runs out. The visible symptoms of nitrogen deficiency include uniform yellowing, or chlorosis, of older leaves. Chlorophyll, which is responsible for the green color of leaves, contains nitrogen. Without nitrogen there is no chlorophyll, and without chlorophyll, the yellow pigments become visible. Inadequate available iron in the soil can also cause chlorosis because, although it is not contained in the chlorophyll molecule, iron is required for chlorophyll synthesis. However, iron deficiency commonly causes chlorosis of the youngest leaves, with their veins sometimes remaining green. The reason for this difference is that nitrogen is readily translocated in the plant and can be redistributed from older tissues to younger tissues to favor their growth. Iron, on the other hand, cannot be readily redistributed. Younger tissues that are actively growing and synthesizing compounds needed for their growth show iron deficiency before older leaves, which have already completed their growth.36.2.2 Several essential elements fulfill multiple roles 636Several essential elements fulfill multiple roles-some structural, others catalytic. Magnesium, as we have mentioned, is a constituent of the chlorophyll molecule and hence is essential to photosynthesis. It is also required as a cofactor by numerous enzymes in cellular respiration and other metabolic pathways. Phosphorus, usually in phosphate groups, is found in many organic compounds, particularly in nucleic acids and in the intermediates of the energy pathways of photosynthesis and glycolysis. The transfer of phosphate groups occurs in many energy-storing and energy-releasing reactions, notably those that use or produce ATP. Other roles of phosphate groups include the activation and inactivation of enzymes. Calcium plays many roles in plants. Its function in the processing of hormonal and environmental cues is the subject of great biological interest, as we'll see in the next chapter. Calcium also affects membranes and cytoskeleton activity, participates in spindle formation for mitosis and meiosis, and is a constituent of the middle lamella of cell walls. Other elements, such as iron and potassium, also play multiple roles.All of these elements are essential to the life of all plants. How did biologists discover which elements are essential?36.2.3 The identification of essential elements 637An element is considered essential if a plant fails to complete its life cycle, or grows abnormally, when that element is not available, or is not available in sufficient quantities. This technique is limited, however, by the possibility that some elements thought to be absent from the test solutions are actually present. Impurities and contamination are always possible. In early experiments on plant nutrition, some of the chemicals used were so impure that they provided micronutrients that the investigators thought they had excluded. Some mineral nutrients are required in such tiny amounts that there may be enough in a seed to supply the embryo and the resultant plant throughout its lifetime and leave enough in the next seed to get the next generation well started. Simply touching a plant may give it a significant dose of chlorine in the form of chloride ions from sweat. Only rarely are new essential elements reported now. Either the list is nearly complete, or more likely, we will need more sophisticated techniques to add to it.Where does the plant find its essential mineral nutrients? How does it absorb them? 36.3 Soils and Plants 637Soils are very important to plants, and plant interactions with the soil are complex. Plants obtain their mineral nutrients from the soil solution or the water in which they grow. Water for terrestrial plants also comes from the soil, as does the supply of oxygen for the roots. Soil also provides mechanical support for plants on land, and it harbors bacteria that perform chemical reactions leading to products required for plant growth. On the other hand, soil may also contain organisms harmful to plants. In the pages that follow, we'll examine the composition and structure of soils, their formation, their role in plant nutrition, their care and supplementation in agriculture, and their modification by the plants that grow in them.36.3.1 Soils are complex in structure 637Soils are complex systems of living and nonliving components. The living components include plant roots, as well as populations of bacteria, fungi, and animals such as earthworms and insects. The nonliving portion of the soil includes rock fragments ranging in size from large boulders to tiny particles called clay that are 2 ?m or less in diameter. Soils also contain water and dissolved mineral nutrients, air spaces, and dead organic matter. The air spaces are crucial sources of oxygen for plant roots. Soils change constantly through natural causes-such as rain, temperature extremes, and the activities of plants and animals-as well as human activities-farming in particular. The structure of many soils changes with depth, revealing a soil profile. Although soils differ greatly, almost all soils consist of two or more horizons-recognizable horizontal layers-lying on top of one another. Mineral nutrients tend to be leached-dissolved in rain or irrigation water and carried to deeper horizons.Soil scientists recognize three major zones (A, B, and C) in the profile of a typical soil. Topsoil is the A horizon, from which mineral nutrients may be depleted by leaching. Most of the organic matter in the soil is in the A horizon, as are most roots, earthworms, insects, nematodes, and microorganisms. Successful agriculture depends on the presence of a suitable A horizon. Pure sand contains plenty of air spaces, but is low in water and mineral nutrients. Clay contains lots of nutrients and more water than sand does, but it is low in air. A little bit of clay goes a long way in affecting soil properties. A loam has significant amounts of sand, silt, and clay, and thus has good levels of air, water, and nutrients for plants. Most of the best topsoils for agriculture are loams. Below the A horizon is the B horizon, or subsoil, which is the zone of infiltration and accumulation of materials leached from above. Farther down, the C horizon is the original parent rock from which the soil is derived. Some deep-growing roots extend into the B horizon, but roots rarely enter the C horizon.36.3.2 Soils form through the weathering of rock 638The type of soil in a given area depends on the type of rock from which it formed, the climate, the landscape features, the organisms living there, and the length of time that soil-forming processes have been acting (sometimes millions of years). Rocks are broken down in part by mechanical weathering, which is the physical breakdown-without any accompanying chemical changes-of materials by wetting, drying, and freezing. The most important parts of soil formation, however, include chemical weathering, the chemical alteration of at least some of the materials in the rocks. The key process is the formation of clay. Both the physical and the chemical properties of soils depend on the amount and kind of clay particles they contain. Just grinding up rocks does not produce a clay that binds mineral nutrients and aggregates into particles. Such a clay results only from chemical weathering.36.3.3 Soils are the source of plant nutrition 638The supply of mineral nutrients for plants depends on the presence of clay particles in the soil. Many of the minerals that are important for plant nutrition, such as potassium (K+), magnesium (Mg2+), and calcium (Ca2+), exist in soil as positively charged ions, or cations. Clay particles have a net negative charge, which they get from negatively charged ions that are permanently attached to them. Cations in solution are attracted to these negative ions. To become available to plants, the cations must be detached from the clay particles. This task is accomplished by reactions with protons (hydrogen ions, H+). Roots release protons into the soil, and they are also released by the ionization of carbonic acid (H2CO3), which is formed whenever CO2 from respiring roots or from the atmosphere dissolves in water. Protons bond more strongly to the clay particles than do the mineral cations, so they trade places with the cations, thus putting the nutrients back into the soil solution. This trading of places is called ion exchange. The fertility of a soil is determined in part by its ability to provide nutrients in this manner. Clay particles effectively hold and exchange positively charged ions, but there is no comparable mechanism for exchanging negatively charged ions. As a result, important negative ions such as nitrate (NO3-) and sulfate (SO42-)-the primary and direct sources of nitrogen and sulfur-leach rapidly from soil, whereas positive ions tend to be retained in the A horizon. The reservoir of soil nitrogen is the organic matter in the soil, which slowly decomposes to release nitrogen in a form available to plants.36.3.4 Fertilizers and lime are used in agriculture 639Agricultural soils often require fertilizers because irrigation and rainwater leach mineral nutrients from the soil, and the harvesting of crops removes the nutrients that the plants took up from the soil during their growth. Crop yields decrease if any essential element is depleted. Mineral nutrients may be replaced by organic fertilizers, such as rotted manure, or inorganic fertilizers of various types. The three elements most commonly added to agricultural soils are nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K). Commercial fertilizers are characterized by their "N-P-K" percentages. A 5-10-10 fertilizer, for example, contains 5 percent nitrogen, 10 percent phosphate (P2O5), and 10 percent potash (K2O) by weight. Sulfur, in the form of a sulfate, is also occasionally added to soils. The analysis is by weight and is not reported as elemental N, P, and K. A 5-10-10 fertilizer actually does contain 5 percent nitrogen, but only 4.3 percent phosphorus and 8.3 percent potassium on an elemental basis. Either organic or inorganic fertilizers can provide the necessary mineral nutrients for plants. Organic fertilizers release nutrients slowly, which results in less leaching than a one-time application of inorganic fertilizer. Organic fertilizers also contain materials that improve the physical properties of the soil, providing spaces for gas movement, root growth, and drainage. Inorganic fertilizers, on the other hand, provide an almost instantaneous supply of soil nutrients and can be formulated to meet the requirements of a particular soil and a particular crop. The availability of nutrient ions, whether they are naturally present in the soil or added as fertilizer, is altered by changes in soil pH. The optimal soil pH for most crops is about 6.5, but so-called acid-loving crops such as blueberries prefer a pH closer to 4. Rainfall and the decomposition of organic substances in the soil lower its pH. Such acidification of the soil can be reversed by liming-the application of compounds commonly known as lime, such as calcium carbonate, calcium hydroxide, or magnesium carbonate. The addition of these compounds leads to the removal of H+ ions from the soil. Liming also increases the availability of calcium to plants, which require it as a macronutrient.It is easy to guess how humans learned to use fertilizer: It didn't take much insight to notice improved plant growth around animal feces. Perhaps a similar observation of limestone, or chalk, or oyster shells-all sources of calcium carbonate-led to the practice of liming. Sometimes, on the other hand, a soil is not acidic enough. In this case, a farmer can add sulfur, and soil bacteria will convert it to sulfuric acid. Iron and some other elements are more available to plants at a slightly acidic pH. Soil pH testing is useful for home gardens and lawns as well as for agriculture. Spraying leaves with a nutrient solution is another effective way to deliver some essential elements to growing plants. Plants take up more copper, iron, and manganese when these elements are applied as foliar (leaf) sprays than when they are added to the soil as fertilizer. Adjusting the concentrations of nutrient ions and pH in order to optimize uptake and to minimize toxicity can yield excellent results. Such foliar application of mineral nutrients is increasingly used in wheat production, but fertilizer is still delivered most commonly by way of the soil.36.3.5 Plants affect soils 639The soil that forms in a particular place also depends on the types of plants growing there. Plant litter, such as dead fallen leaves, is the major source of carbon-rich materials that break down to form humus-dark-colored organic material, each particle of which is too small to be recognizable with the naked eye. Soil bacteria and fungi produce humus by breaking down plant litter, animal feces, and other organic material. Humus is rich in mineral nutrients, especially nitrogen. Humus in combination with clay promotes a soil structure favorable to plant growth, promoting adequate supplies of both water and oxygen to the roots. Plants affect the pH of the soil in which they grow. Roots maintain a balance of electric charges. If they absorb more cations than anions, they excrete H+ ions, thus lowering the soil pH. If they absorb more anions than cations, they excrete OH- ions or HCO3- ions, raising the soil pH. The mineral nutrient most commonly limiting, in both natural and agricultural situations, is nitrogen. Let's consider how nitrogen is made available to plants. 36.4 Nitrogen Fixation 640Earth's atmosphere is a vast reservoir of nitrogen in the form of nitrogen gas (N2). N2 constitutes almost four-fifths of the atmosphere. However, plants cannot use N2 directly as a nutrient. It is a highly unreactive substance-the triple bond linking the two nitrogen atoms is extremely stable, and a great deal of energy is required to break it. A few species of bacteria have an enzyme that enables them to convert N2 into a more reactive form by a process called nitrogen fixation. These prokaryotic organisms-nitrogen fixers-convert N2 to ammonia (NH3). There are relatively few species of nitrogen fixers, and their biomass is small relative to the mass of other organisms that depend on them for survival on Earth. This talented group of prokaryotes is just as essential to the biosphere as are the photosynthetic autotrophs.36.4.1 Nitrogen fixers make all other life possible 640By far the greatest share of total world nitrogen fixation is performed biologically by nitrogen-fixing organisms, which fix approximately 170 million Mg (megagrams, metric tons) of nitrogen per year. About 80 million Mg is fixed industrially by humans. A smaller amount of nitrogen is fixed in the atmosphere by non-biological means such as lightning, volcanic eruption, and forest fires. Rain brings these atmospherically formed products to the ground. Several groups of bacteria fix nitrogen. In the oceans, various photosynthetic bacteria, including cyanobacteria, fix nitrogen. In fresh water, cyanobacteria are the principal nitrogen fixers. On land, free-living soil bacteria make some contribution to nitrogen fixation, but they fix only what they need for their own use and release the fixed nitrogen only when they die. Other nitrogen-fixing bacteria live in close association with plant roots. They release up to 90 percent of the nitrogen they fix to the plant and excrete some amino acids into the soil, making nitrogen immediately available to other organisms.Bacteria of the genus Rhizobium fix nitrogen only in close association with the roots of plants in the legume family. The legumes include peas, soybeans, clover, alfalfa, and many tropical shrubs and trees. The bacteria infect the plant's roots, and the roots develop nodules in response to their presence. The various species of Rhizobium show a fairly high specificity for the species of legume they infect. Farmers and gardeners coat legume seeds with Rhizobium to make sure the bacteria are present. Some farmers alternate their crops, planting clover or alfalfa occasionally to increase the available nitrogen content of the soil. The legume-Rhizobium association is not the only bacterial association that fixes nitrogen. Some cyanobacteria fix nitrogen in association with fungi in lichens or with ferns, cycads, or nontracheophytes. Rice farmers can increase crop yields by growing the water fern Azolla, with its symbiotic nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium, in the flooded fields where rice is grown. Another group of bacteria, the filamentous actinomycetes, fix nitrogen in association with root nodules on woody species such as alder and mountain lilacs. How does biological nitrogen fixation work? In the four sections that follow, we'll consider the role of the enzyme nitrogenase, the mutualistic collaboration of plant and bacterial cells in root nodules, the need to supplement biological nitrogen fixation in agriculture, and the contributions of plants and bacteria to the global nitrogen cycle.36.4.2 Nitrogenase catalyzes nitrogen fixation 640Nitrogen fixation is the reduction of nitrogen gas. It proceeds by the stepwise addition of three pairs of hydrogen atoms. In addition to N2, these reactions require a strong reducing agent to transfer hydrogen atoms to nitrogen and the intermediate products, as well as a great deal of energy, which is supplied by ATP. Depending on the species of nitrogen fixer, either respiration or photosynthesis may provide both the necessary reducing agent and ATP. The reactants are firmly bound to the surface of a single enzyme, called nitrogenase. Nitrogenase is so strongly inhibited by oxygen (O2) that its discovery was delayed because investigators had not thought to seek it under anaerobic conditions. Because nitrogenase cannot function in the presence of oxygen, it is not surprising that many nitrogen fixers are anaerobes. Legumes respire aerobically, as do Rhizobium. Within a root nodule, oxygen is maintained at a level sufficient to support respiration but not so high as to inactivate nitrogenase.36.4.3 Some plants and bacteria work together to fix nitrogen 641The legume nodule provides an excellent example of symbiosis, in which two different organisms live in physical contact. In the form of symbiosis called mutualism, both organisms benefit from their relationship. The legume obtains fixed nitrogen from the bacterium, and the bacterium obtains the products of photosynthesis from the plant. Neither free-living Rhizobium species nor uninfected legumes can fix nitrogen. Only when the two are closely associated in root nodules does the reaction take place. The establishment of this symbiosis between Rhizobium and a legume requires a complex series of steps, with active contributions by both the bacteria and the plant root. First the root releases flavonoids and other chemical signals that attract the Rhizobium to the vicinity of the root. Flavonoids trigger the transcription of bacterial nod genes, which encode Nod (nodulation) factors. These factors, secreted by the bacteria, cause cell divisions in the root cortex, leading to the formation of a primary nodule meristem. Within the nodules, the bacteria take the form of bacteroids within membranous vesicles. Bacteroids are swollen, deformed bacteria that can fix nitrogen. Before the bacteroids can begin to fix nitrogen, the plant must produce the protein leghemoglobin, which surrounds the bacteroids. Leghemoglobin is a close relative of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying pigment of animals. Some plant nodules contain enough of it to be bright pink when viewed in cross section. Leghemoglobin, with its iron-containing heme, transports oxygen to the bacteroids to support their respiration. The partnership between bacterium and plant in nitrogen-fixing nodules is not the only case in which plants depend upon other organisms for assistance with their nutrition. Another example that we considered earlier is that of mycorrhizae, root-fungus associations in which the fungus greatly increases the absorption of water and minerals (especially phosphorus) by the plant. A growing body of evidence suggests that nodule formation depends upon some of the same genes and mechanisms that allow mycorrhizae to develop.36.4.4 Biological nitrogen fixation does not always meet agricultural needs 641Bacterial nitrogen fixation is not sufficient to support the needs of agriculture. Traditional farmers used to plant dead fish along with corn so that the decaying fish would release fixed nitrogen that the developing corn could use. Industrial nitrogen fixation is becoming ever more important to world agriculture because of the degradation of soils and the need to feed a rapidly expanding population. Research on biological nitrogen fixation is being vigorously pursued, with commercial applications very much in mind. Most industrial nitrogen fixation is done by a chemical process called the Haber process, which requires a great deal of energy. An alternative is urgently needed because of the cost of energy. At present, the manufacture of nitrogen-containing fertilizer takes more energy than does any other aspect of crop production in the United States. One line of investigation centers on recombinant DNA technology as a means of engineering new plants that produce their own nitrogenase. Workers in many industrial and academic laboratories are attempting to insert bacterial genes coding for nitrogenase into the cells of angiosperms, particularly crop plants. Developing crops that can fix their own nitrogen, however, will take more than just the insertion of genes for nitrogenase. Biotechnology must also find ways to exclude O2 and obtain strong reducing agents and an energy source. Ultimately, the need for ATP represents a greater technical challenge than the insertion of nitrogenase genes. The stakes, however-especially the financial ones-are great, and a great effort is being invested in research along these lines.36.4.5 Plants and bacteria participate in the global nitrogen cycle 642The reduced nitrogen released into the soil by nitrogen fixers is primarily in the form of ammonia (NH3) and ammonium ions (NH4+). Although ammonia is toxic to plants, ammonium ions can be taken up safely at low concentrations. Soil bacteria called nitrifiers, which we described in Chapter 26, oxidize ammonia to nitrate ions (NO3-)-another form that plants can take up-by the process of nitrification. Soil pH affects uptake: Nitrate ions are taken up preferentially under more acidic conditions, ammonium ions under more basic ones. The steps that we have followed so far are carried out by bacteria: N2 is reduced to ammonia in nitrogen fixation and ammonia is oxidized to nitrate in nitrification. The next steps are carried out by plants, which reduce the nitrate they have taken up all the way back to ammonia. All the reactions of nitrate reduction are carried on by the plant's own enzymes. The later steps, from nitrite (NO2-) to ammonia, take place in the chloroplasts, but this conversion is not part of photosynthesis. The plant uses the ammonia thus formed to manufacture amino acids, from which the plant's proteins and all its other nitrogen-containing compounds are formed. Animals cannot reduce nitrogen, and they depend on plants to supply them with reduced nitrogenous compounds. Bacteria called denitrifiers return nitrogen from animal wastes and dead organisms to the atmosphere as N2. This process, described in Chapter 26, is called denitrification. In combination with leaching and the removal of crops, it keeps the level of available nitrogen in soils low. Nitrogen metabolism, in bacteria and in plants, is complex. It is also of great importance: Nitrogen-containing compounds constitute 5 to 30 percent of a plant's total dry weight. The nitrogen content of animals is even higher, and all the nitrogen in the animal world arrives there by way of the plant kingdom. 36.5 Sulfur Metabolism 643All living things require sulfur, which is a constituent of two amino acids, cysteine and methionine, and hence of almost all proteins. Sulfur is also a component of other biologically crucial compounds, such as coenzyme A. Animals must obtain their cysteine and methionine from plants, but plants can make their own, using sulfate ions obtained from the soil or from a liquid environment. Except for oxygen, all of the most abundant elements in plants are taken up from the environment in their most oxidized forms-sulfur as sulfate, carbon as carbon dioxide, nitrogen as nitrate, phosphorus as phosphate, and hydrogen as water. In plants, sulfate is reduced and incorporated into cysteine. From this amino acid all the other sulfur-containing compounds in the plant are made. Sulfate reduction and the utilization of cysteine are analogous to the reduction of nitrate to ammonia and the subsequent utilization of ammonia by plants. 36.6 Heterotrophic and Carnivorous Seed Plants 643Thus far in this chapter we have considered the mineral nutrition of plants. As you already know, another crucial aspect of plant nutrition is photosynthesis-the principal source of energy and carbon for plants themselves and for the biosphere as a whole. Not all plants, however, are photosynthetic autotrophs. A few, in the course of their evolution, have lost the ability to sustain themselves by photosynthesis. How do these plants get their energy and carbon? A few plants are parasites that obtain their food directly from the living bodies of other plants. Perhaps the most familiar parasitic plants are the mistletoes and dodders. Mistletoes are green and carry on some photosynthesis, but they parasitize other plants for water and mineral nutrients and may derive photosynthetic products from them as well. Mistletoes and dodders extract nutrients from the vascular tissues of their hosts by forming absorptive organs, called haustoria, that invade the host plant tissue. Another parasitic plant, the Indian pipe, once was thought to obtain its food from dead organic matter. It is now known to get its nutrients, with the help of fungi, from nearby actively photosynthesizing plants. Hence it too is a parasite. Some other plants that do not live by photosynthesis alone are the 450 or so carnivorous species-those that augment their nitrogen and phosphorus supply by capturing and digesting flies and other insects. The best-known carnivorous plants are Venus flytraps (genus Dionaea), sundews (genus Drosera), and pitcher plants (genus Sarracenia).Carnivorous plants are normally found in boggy regions where the soil is acidic. Most decay-causing organisms require a less acidic pH to break down the bodies of dead organisms, so relatively little nitrogen is recycled into these acidic soils. Accordingly, the carnivorous plants have adaptations that allow them to augment their supply of nitrogen by capturing animals and digesting their proteins. Sarracenia produces pitcher-shaped leaves that collect small amounts of rainwater. Insects are attracted into the pitchers either by bright colors or by scent and are prevented from getting out again by stiff, downward-pointing hairs. The insects eventually die and are digested by a combination of enzymes and bacteria in the water. Even rats have been found in large pitcher plants. Sundews have leaves covered with hairs that secrete a clear, sticky, sugary liquid. An insect touching one of these hairs becomes stuck, and more hairs curve over the insect and stick to it as well. The plant secretes enzymes to digest the insect and later absorbs the carbon- and nitrogen-containing products of digestion. None of the carnivorous plants must feed on insects. They grow adequately without insects, but in their natural habitats they grow faster and are a darker green when they succeed in catching insects. The additional nitrogen from the insects is used to make more proteins, chlorophyll, and other nitrogen-containing compounds.37 Plant Growth RegulationMore than a century ago, Charles Darwin and his son studied the growth of plant shoots toward the light. Their findings, which we will detail in this chapter, pointed the way to the eventual discovery of the photoreceptor molecules that capture light signals and the hormones that transmit those signals to other parts of the plant. Light and hormones affect many processes in plants, as diverse as stem growth, flowering, bud dormancy, and the dropping of leaves in autumn. Several of the hormones now find important commercial applications, ranging from the regulation of fruit ripening to enhanced germination of barley for the brewing industry. Recent advances in understanding the complexities of plant development have come largely from work with Arabidopsis thaliana, a little mustard-like weed. This plant is useful to researchers because its body and seeds are tiny, and its genome is unusually small for a flowering plant. It also flowers and forms seeds in a relatively short time after growth begins. Arabidopsis mutants with altered developmental patterns provide evidence for the existence of hormones and for the mechanisms of hormone and photoreceptor action.In this chapter we first give a brief overview of the life of a flowering plant and its developmental stages. We explore the envirnomental cues, photoreceptors, and hormones that regulate plant development, and consider the multiple roles that each plays in normal development. 37.1 Interacting Factors in Plant Development 646The development of a plant-the series of progressive changes that take place throughout its life-is regulated in complex ways. Fourfactors take part in this regulation: The plant senses and responds to environmental cues. In order to sense environmental cues, the plant uses receptors, such as photoreceptors that absorb light. Chemical messages, or hormones, mediate the effects of the environmental cues sensed by the receptors. The plant's genome encodes the enzymes that catalyze reactions, including the ones that make hormones and receptors, produce chemical building blocks, and participate in protein synthesis and energy metabolism.37.1.1 Several hormones and photoreceptors regulate plant growth 646Hormones are regulatory compounds that act at very low concentrations at sites distant from where they are produced. They mediate many developmental phenomena in plants, such as stem growth and autumn leaf fall. Unlike animals, which produce each hormone in a specific part of the body, plants produce hormones in many of their cells. Each plant hormone plays multiple regulatory roles, affecting several different aspects of development. Interactions among the hormones are often complex. Like hormones, photoreceptors regulate many developmental processes in plants. Unlike the hormones, which are small molecules, plant photoreceptors are proteins. Light (an environmental cue) acts directly on photoreceptors, which in turn regulate processes such as the many changes accompanying the growth of a young plant out of the soil and into the light. No matter what cues direct development, ultimately the plant's genome determines the limits within which the plant and its parts will develop. The genome is the master plan of the plant, but its interpretation depends on conditions in the environment. It is also the target for some hormone actions. For several decades hormones and photoreceptors were the focus of most work on plant development, but recent advances in molecular genetics now allow us to focus on underlying processes such as signal transduction pathways.37.1.2 Signal transduction pathways mediate hormone and photoreceptor action 647We introduced the topic of signal transduction pathways in Chapter 15. Plants, like other organisms, make extensive use of these pathways. Cell signaling in plant development involves three steps: a receptor (for a hormone or for light), a signal transduction pathway, and the ultimate cellular response. Protein kinase cascades amplify responses to receptor binding in plants, as they do in other organisms. The signal transduction pathways of plants differ from those of animals only in the details; for example, their protein kinases phosphorylate the amino acid residues serine or threonine instead of tyrosine. Before concerning ourselves with molecular details, let's set a broader context. What is the general pattern of plant development? 37.2 From Seed to Death: An Overview of Plant Development 647Let's review the life history of a flowering plant, from seed to death, focusing on how the developmental events are regulated. As plants develop, environmental cues, photoreceptors, and hormones affect three fundamental processes: cell division, cell expansion, and cell differentiation.37.2.1 The seed germinates and forms a growing seedling 647All developmental activity may be suspended in a seed, even when conditions appear to be suitable for its growth. In other words, a seed may be dormant. Typically, only 5 to 20 percent of its weight is water, whereas most plant parts contain far more water. Cells in dormant seeds do not divide, expand, or differentiate. For the embryo to begin developing, seed dormancy must be broken by one of several physical mechanisms, such as exposure to light, mechanical abrasion, fire, or leaching of inhibitors by water. As the seed germinates (begins to develop), it first imbibes (takes up) water. The growing embryo must then obtain building blocks-monomers-for its development by digesting the polysaccharides, fats, and proteins stored in the cotyledons or in the endosperm. The embryos of some plant species secrete hormones that direct the mobilization of these reserves. If the seed germinates underground, the new seedling must elongate rapidly and cope with life in darkness or dim light. A photoreceptor controls this stage, and ends it when the shoot is exposed to sufficient light to begin photosynthesis. Early shoot development varies among the flowering plants. Plant growth from seedling to adult, both in darkness and in light, also involves several hormones.
37.2.2 The plant flowers and sets fruit 648Flowering-the formation of reproductive organs-may be initiated when the plant reaches an appropriate age or size. Some plant species, however, flower at particular times of the year, meaning that the plant must sense the appropriatetime. In these plants, the leaves measure the length of the night (shorter in summer, longer in winter) with great precision. Light absorbed by photoreceptors affects this time-measuring process. Once a leaf has determined that it is time for the plant to flower, that information must be transported as a signal to the places where flowers will form. The means by which this signal is transmitted remains a mystery, but it is likely that a "flowering hormone" travels from the leaf to the point of flower formation. After flowers form, hormones play further roles. Hormones and other substances control the growth of a pollen tube down the style of a pistil. Following fertilization, a fruit develops and ripens under hormonal control.37.2.3 The plant senesces and dies 648Some plants, known as perennials, continue to grow year after year. Many perennials have buds that enter a state of winter dormancy during the cold season. A hormone called abscisic acid helps maintain this dormancy. In many species, leaves senesce (deteriorate because of aging) and fall at the end of the growing season, shortly before the onset of the severe conditions of winter. Leaf fall (abscission) is regulated by an interplay of the hormones ethylene and auxin. Finally, the entire plant senesces and dies. Death, which may be initiated by signals from the environment, follows senescent changes that are controlled by hormones such as ethylene. This life history pattern appears to be an adaptation for producing more offspring by pumping energy (food) and nutrients into the seeds;in so doing, the parent plant essentially starves itself to death. We have reached the end of the plant's life history. Now let's examine how the various steps are regulated. We'll begin with regulation at the start of the life history-the seed and its germination. 37.3 Ending Seed Dormancy and Beginning Germination 649The seeds of some species are, in effect, instant plants: All they need for germination is water. But many other species have seeds whose germination is regulated in more complex ways. Seed dormancy may last for weeks, months, years, or even centuries. The mechanisms of dormancy are numerous and diverse, but three principal strategies dominate: Exclusion of water or oxygen from the embryo by means of an impermeable seed coat; Techanical restraint of the embryo by means of a tough seed coat; Chemical inhibition of embryo development. The dormancy of seeds with impermeable coats can be broken if the seed coat is abraded as the seed tumbles across the ground or through creek beds, or passes through the digestive tract of an animal. Soil microorganisms probably play a major role in softening seed coats. Fire can release mechanical restraint. It can also melt wax in seed coats, removing the waterproofing and allowing water to reach the embryo. Leaching-prolonged exposure to water-is one way to reduce the level of a water-soluble chemical inhibitor and end dormancy. Scorching of seeds by fire can also break down some inhibitors.37.3.1 Seed dormancy affords adaptive advantages 649What are the potential advantages of seed dormancy? For many species, dormancy assures survival through unfavorable conditions and results in germination when conditions are more favorable. To avoid germination in the dry days of late summer, for example, some seeds must be exposed to a long cold period before they will germinate. Other seeds will not germinate until a certain amount of time has passed, regardless of how they are treated. This strategy prevents germination while the seed of a cereal grain, for example, is still attached to the parent plant. Dormancy may also increase the likelihood of a seed's germinating in the right place. Some cypress trees, for example, grow in standing water, and their seeds germinate only if inhibitors are leached by water. Seeds that must be scorched by fire in order to germinate avoid competition by germinating only when an area has been cleared by fire. Light-requiring seeds, which germinate only at or near the surface of the soil, are generally tiny seeds with few food reserves. Conversely, germination of some seeds is inhibited by light; these seeds germinate only when buried and thus kept in darkness. Light-inhibited seeds are usually large and well stocked with nutrients. Seed dormancy helps annual plants counter the effects of year-to-year variation in the environment. The seeds of some annuals remain dormant throughout an unfavorable year. The seeds of other plants germinate at different times during the year, increasing the likelihood that at least some of the seedlings will encounter favorable conditions.37.3.2 Seed germination begins with the uptake of water 650The first step in seed germination is the uptake of water, called imbibition. A seed's water potential (see Chapter 35) is very negative, and water can be taken up readily if the seed coat allows it. The magnitude of this water potential is demonstrated by the force exerted by seeds expanding in water. Cocklebur seeds that are imbibing can exert a pressure of up to 1,000 atmospheres (about 100 megapascals) against a restraining force. As a seed takes up water, it undergoes metabolic changes: Certain existing enzymes become activated, RNA and then proteins are synthesized, the rate of cellular respiration increases, and other metabolic pathways become activated. In many seeds there is no DNA synthesis and no cell division during these early stages of germination. Initially, growth results solely from the expansion of small, preformed cells. DNA is synthesized only after the embryonic root, called the radicle, begins to grow and poke out beyond the seed coat.37.3.3 The embryo must mobilize its reserves 650Until the young plant (the seedling) becomes able to photosynthesize, it depends on reserves stored in the endosperm or cotyledons. The principal reserve of energy and carbon in many seeds is starch. Other seeds store fats or oils. Usually, the endosperm of the seed holds amino acid reserves in the form of proteins, rather than as free amino acids. The giant molecules of starch, lipids, and proteins must be digested by enzymes into monomers that can enter the cells of the embryo. The polymer starch yields glucose for energy metabolism. The digestion of reserve proteins provides the amino acids the embryo needs to synthesize its own proteins. The digestion of lipids releases glycerol and fatty acids, both of which can be metabolized for energy. Glycerol and fatty acids can also be converted to glucose, which permits fat-storing plants to make all the building blocks they need for growth. In germinating barley and other cereal seeds, the embryo secretes gibberellins, one of several classes of plant growth hormones. Gibberellins diffuse through the endosperm to a surrounding tissue called the aleurone layer, which lies inside the seed coat. The gibberellins trigger a crucial series of events in the aleurone layer, culminating in the release of enzymes that digest proteins and starch stored in the endosperm. Commercially, gibberellins are used in the brewing industry to enhance the "malting" (germination) of barley and the breakdown of its endosperm, producing sugar that is fermented to alcohol. 37.4 Gibberellins: Regulators from Germination to Fruit Growth 650Gibberellins produce a wide variety of effects on plant development in addition to triggering digestive enzyme synthesis. We begin our discussion of the different plant growth hormones by discussing the discovery of the gibberellins, as well as their many effects.37.4.1 Foolish seedlings led to the discovery of the gibberellins 651The gibberellins are a large family of closely related compounds. Some are found in plants and others in a pathogenic (disease-causing) fungus, where they were first discovered. In 1809, the study of the gibberellins began indirectly with observations of the bakanae, or "foolish seedling," disease of rice. Seedlings affected by this disease grow tall more rapidly than their healthy neighbors, but this rapid growth gives rise to spindly plants that die before producing seed (the rice grain used for food). The disease has had considerable economic impacts in several parts of the world. It is caused by the ascomycete fungus Gibberella fujikuroi. In 1925, the Japanese biologist Eiichi Kurosawa grew G. fujikuroi on a liquid medium, then separated the fungus from the medium by filtering. He heated the filtered medium to kill any remaining fungus, but the resulting heat-treated filtrate still caused rapid growth in rice seedlings. Medium that had never contained the fungus did not stimulate seedling growth. This experiment established that G. fujikuroi produces a growth-promoting chemical substance, which Kurosawa called a gibberellin. Were the gibberellins simply exotic products of an obscure fungus, or did they play a more general role in the growth of plants? Bernard O. Phinney of the University of California, Los Angeles, answered this question in part in 1956, when he reported the spectacular growth-promoting effect of gibberellins on dwarf corn seedlings. He used plants that were known to be genetic dwarfs; each phenotype was produced when a particular recessive allele (say, d1) was present in the homozygous condition (d1/ d1). Gibberellins applied to nondwarf-normal-corn seedlings had almost no effect, but gibberellins applied to the dwarfs caused them to grow as tall as their normal relatives.
This result suggested to Phinney (1) that gibberellins are normal constituents of corn, and perhaps of all plants, and (2) that dwarf plants are short because they cannot produce their own gibberellins. According to Phinney's hypothesis, nondwarf plants manufacture enough gibberellins to promote their full growth, but dwarf plants do not. Extracts from numerous plant species were found to promote growth in dwarf corn. These findings provided direct evidence that plants that are not genetic dwarfs contain gibberellin-like substances. Phinney's work set the stage for today's use of mutant plants to investigate the control of plant development. The roots, leaves, and flowers of a dwarf corn plant appear normal, but the stems are much shorter than those of wild-type plants. All parts of the dwarf plant contain a much lower concentration of gibberellins than do the organs of a wild-type plant. We may infer, then, that stem elongation requires gibberellins or the products of gibberellin action. We can further conclude that gibberellins play a less essential role in the development of roots, leaves, and flowers. Although more than 80 gibberellins have been identified, only one, gibberellin A1, actually controls stem elongation in most plants. The other gibberellins found in stems are simply intermediates in the production of gibberellin A1. As we will see in the next section, gibberellins affect processes other than stem elongation, but we do not yet know which gibberellin has any other particular effect.37.4.2 The gibberellins have many effects 652Gibberellins and other hormones regulate the growth of fruits. It has long been known that seedless grapes (an inbred strain) form smaller fruit than their seeded relatives. Experimental removal of seeds from very young seeded grapes prevented normal fruit growth, suggesting that the seeds are sources of a fruit growth regulator. It was then shown that spraying young seedless grapes with a gibberellin solution caused them to grow as large as seeded ones. It is now a standard commercial procedure to spray seedless grapes with gibberellins. Subsequent biochemical studies showed that the developing seeds produce gibberellins, which diffuse out into the immature fruit tissue. Some biennial plants respond dramatically to an increased level of gibberellins. Biennials grow vegetatively in their first year and flower and die in their second year. In the second year, the apical meristems of biennials respond to environmental cues by producing elongated shoots that eventually bear flowers. This elongation is called bolting. When the plant senses the appropriate environmental cue-longer days or a sufficient winter chilling-it produces more gibberellins, raising the gibberellin concentration to a level that causes the shoot to bolt. Plants of some biennial species will bolt when sprayed with a gibberellin solution without the environmental cue. Gibberellins also cause fruit to grow from unfertilized flowers, promote seed germination in lettuce and some other species, and help bring spring buds out of winter dormancy. Most hormones have multiple effects within the plant, and they often interact with one another in regulating developmental processes. In controlling stem elongation, for example, gibberellins interact with another hormone, auxin. 37.5 Auxin Affects Plant Growth and Form 652If you pinch off the apical bud at the top of a bean plant, inactive lateral buds become active, developing into branches. Similarly, pruning a shrub causes an increase in branching. If you cut off the blade of a leaf but leave its petiole (stalk) attached to the plant, the petiole drops off sooner than it would have if the leaf were intact. If a plant is kept indoors, its shoot system grows toward a window. These diverse responses of shoot systems are all mediated by a plant hormone called auxin, or indoleacetic acid (IAA).  In the discussions that follow, we will look at the discovery of auxin, its transport within the plant, and its role as mediator of the effects of light and gravity on plant growth. We'll discover its many effects on vegetative growth and on fruit development. Then we'll examine its mechanism of action.37.5.1 Plant movements led to the discovery of auxin 653The discovery of auxin and its numerous physiological effects can be traced back to work done in the 1880s by Charles Darwin and his son Francis. The Darwins were interested in plant movements. One type of movement they studied was phototropism, the growth of plant structures toward light (as in most shoots) or away from it (as in roots). They asked, What part of the plant senses the light? To answer this question, the Darwins worked with canary grass (Phalaris canariensis) seedlings grown in the dark. A young grass seedling has a coleoptile-a cylindrical sheath a few cells thick that protects the delicate shoot as it pushes through the soil. When the coleoptile breaks through the surface of the soil, it soon stops growing, and the first leaves emerge unharmed. The coleoptiles of grasses are phototropic-they grow toward the light. To find the light-receptive region of the coleoptile, the Darwins tried "blindfolding" the coleoptiles of dark-grown canary grass seedlings in various places, then illuminating them from one side. The coleoptile grew toward the light whenever its tip was exposed. If the top millimeter or more of the coleoptile was covered, however, there was no phototropic response. Thus the tip contains the photoreceptor that responds to light. The actual bending toward the light, however, takes place in a growing region a few millimeters below the tip. Therefore, the Darwins reasoned, some type of message must travel within the coleoptile from the tip to the growing region. Others later demonstrated that the message is a chemical substance by showing that it can move through certain nonliving materials, such as gelatin, but not through others, such as a metal barrier. Further experiments showed that the tip of the coleoptile produces a hormone that moves down the coleoptile to the growing region. If the tip is removed, the growth of the coleoptile is sharply inhibited. If the tip is carefully replaced, growth resumes, even if the tip and base are separated by a thin layer of gelatin. The hormone moves down from the tip, but it does not move from one side of the coleoptile to the other. If the tip is cut off and replaced so that it covers only one side of the cut end of the coleoptile, the coleoptile curves as the cells on the side below the replaced tip grow more rapidly than those on the other side. The Dutch botanist Frits W. Went removed coleoptile tips and placed their cut surfaces on a block of gelatin. Then he placed pieces of the gelatin block on decapitated coleoptiles-positioned to cover only one side, just as coleoptile tips had been placed in earlier experiments. As they grew, the coleoptiles curved toward the side away from the gelatin. This curvature demonstrated that a hormone had indeed diffused into the gelatin block from the isolated coleoptile tips. Went had at last isolated a hormone from a plant. Later chemical analysis showed that this hormone, named auxin, was indoleacetic acid.37.5.2 Auxin transport is polar 653Since being isolated, auxin has been intensively studied. Early experiments showed that its movement through certain plant tissues is strictly polar-that is, unidirectional along a line from apex to base. By inverting some plants or plant parts, scientists determined that the apex-to-base direction of auxin movement has nothing to do with gravity; the polarity of this movement is a totally biological matter. Many plant parts show complete or partial polarity of auxin transport. For example, in most leaf petioles auxin moves only from the blade end toward the stem end.37.5.3 Auxin carrier proteins move auxin into and out of cells 654In one of the most intense areas of current research on auxin, biologists are using Arabidopsis plants that have mutations affecting the transport of auxin. By cloning genes from these plants and characterizing their products, they are finding a growing number of auxin carrier proteins. In polar transport in the stem, a carrier protein imports auxin at the end of the cell toward the shoot apex, and it or another carrier exports auxin at the other end of the cell. Auxin carrier proteins contribute to the establishment of auxin gradients in the plant. As a result, auxin acts as a morphogen (see Chapter 16), telling cells where they lie within the plant and determining how they differentiate. There are probably auxin carrier proteins specific to different tissues and different cells, participating in different auxin responses.37.5.4 Light and gravity affect the direction of plant growth 654While polar auxin transport establishes the orientation of growth, lateral (side-to-side) redistribution of auxin appears to be the mechanism that explains both phototropism and another response depending on differential growth, gravitropism. This redistribution may be carried out by other auxin carrier proteins. When light strikes a coleoptile from one side, auxin at the tip moves laterally toward the shaded side. The imbalance thus established is maintained down the coleoptile, so that in the growing region below, there is more auxin on the shaded side, causing the unequal growth that results in a coleoptile bent toward the light. This bending toward light is phototropism. If you have noticed a house plant bending and pointing toward a window, you have seen phototropism. Even in the dark, auxin moves to the lower side of a shoot that has been tipped over, causing more rapid growth in the lower side and, hence, an upward bending of the shoot. Such growth in a direction determined by gravity is called gravitropism. The upward gravitropic response of shoots is defined as negative; the gravitropism of roots, which bend downward, is positive.37.5.5 Auxin affects vegetative growth in several ways 655Like the gibberellins, auxin has many roles in plant development. It affects the vegetative growth of plants in several ways, including: nitiating root growth in cuttings; Stimulating the detachment of old leaves from their stems (abscission); Maintaining apical dominance; Promoting stem elongation and inhibiting root elongation. Let's examine each of these aspects in turn. Cuttings from the shoots of some plants can produce roots and grow into entire new plants. For this to happen, certain undifferentiated cells in the interior of the shoot, originally destined to function only in food storage, must set off on an new mission: They must differentiate and become organized into the apical meristem of a new root. These changes are very similar to those in the pericycle of a root when a lateral root forms (see Chapter 34). Shoot cuttings of many species can be stimulated to grow profuse roots by dipping the cut surface into an auxin solution; this observation suggests that the plant's own auxin plays a role in the initiation of lateral roots. Commercial preparations that enhance the rooting of plant cuttings typically contain mostly synthetic auxins. The effect of auxin on the detachment of old leaves from stems is quite different from root initiation. This process, called abscission, is the cause of autumn leaf fall. Leaves consist of a blade and a petiole that attaches the blade to the stem. Abscission results from the breakdown of a specific part of the petiole, the abscission zone. If the blade of a leaf is cut off, the petiole falls from the plant more rapidly than if the leaf had remained intact. If the cut surface is treated with an auxin solution, however, the petiole remains attached to the plant, often longer than an intact leaf would have. The time of abscission of leaves in nature appears to be determined in part by a decrease in the movement of auxin, produced in the blade, through the petiole.
Auxin maintains apical dominance, a phenomenon in which apical buds inhibit the growth of lateral buds. This phenomenon can be demonstrated by an experiment with young seedlings. If the plant remains intact, the stem elongates, and the lateral buds remain inactive. Removal of the apical bud-the major site of auxin production-permits the lateral buds to grow out vigorously. If the cut surface of the stem is treated with an auxin solution, however, the lateral buds do not grow. Apical buds of branches also exert apical dominance: The lateral buds on the branch are inactive unless the apex of the branch is removed. In the two experiments on leaves and stems that we have just discussed, removal of a particular part of the plant produces an effect-abscission or loss of apical dominance-and that effect is prevented by treatment with auxin. These results are consistent with other data showing that the excised part of the leaf or stem is an auxin source and that auxin in the intact plant helps maintain apical dominance and delays the abscission of leaves. As we will discover later, other hormones can modify the effects of auxin. Plant growth is regulated more by hormone interactions than by a single hormone. Auxin promotes stem elongation, but it inhibits the elongation of roots. The question of why different organs should respond in opposite ways to the same chemical signal remains unanswered, but is a subject of current research. Many synthetic auxins-chemical analogs of indoleacetic acid-have been produced and studied. One of them, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), has the striking property of being lethal to eudicots at concentrations that are harmless to monocots. This property made 2,4-D an effective selective herbicide that could be sprayed on a lawn or a cereal crop to kill those weeds that are eudicots. However, because 2,4-D takes a long time to break down, it pollutes the environment, so scientists are seeking new approaches to selective weed killing.37.5.6 Auxin controls the development of some fruits 656Although fruit development normally depends on prior fertilization of the egg, in many species treatment of an unfertilized ovary with auxin or gibberellins causes parthenocarpy-fruit formation without fertilization of the egg. Parthenocarpic fruits form spontaneously in some plants, including dandelions, seedless grapes, and cultivated bananas.  All of these activities illustrate the great diversity of important roles that auxin plays. Now let's see how auxin plays one of its roles-promoting stem elongation through effects on the cell wall.37.5.7 Auxin promotes growth by acting on cell walls 656Cell walls are a key to plant growth. The principal strengthening component of the plant cell wall is cellulose, a large polymer of glucose. In the wall, cellulose molecules tend to associate in parallel with one another. Bundles of approximately 250 cellulose molecules make up microfibrils that are visible with an electron microscope. What makes the cell wall rigid is a network of cellulose microfibrils connected by bridges of other, smaller polysaccharides. The orientation of the cellulose microfibrils determines the direction of cell expansion. The growth of a plant cell is driven primarily by the uptake of water, which enters the cytoplasm of the cell and accumulates in its central vacuole. As the vacuole expands, the cell grows rapidly, with the vacuole often making up more than 90 percent of the volume of a mature cell. As the vacuole expands, it presses the cytoplasm against the cell wall, and the wall resists this force. For the cell to grow, its wall must loosen and be stretched. If the wall simply stretched, it would become thinner. However, new polysaccharides are deposited throughout the wall and new cellulose microfibrils are deposited at the inner surface of the wall, maintaining its thickness. Thus the cellulose microfibrils in the outermost part of the wall are the oldest, and those in the innermost part the youngest. The cell wall plays key roles in controlling the rate and direction of growth of a plant cell. How does the plant determine the behavior of its cell walls?
Experiments with segments of oat coleoptiles showed that plant cell walls recover incompletely from being stretched. Reversible stretching is called elasticity, and irreversible stretching is plasticity. Pretreating the coleoptile segments with auxin significantly increased their plasticity; in other words, it loosened the cell walls. This result suggested that auxin-induced cell expansion might result from just such a loosening effect. Auxin acts by causing the release of a "wall-loosening factor" from the cytoplasm. Studies in the 1970s indicated that the wall-loosening factor was sometimes simply hydrogen ions (protons, H+). Acidifying the growth medium (that is, adding H+) causes segments of stems or coleoptiles to grow as rapidly as segments treated with auxin. Furthermore, treating coleoptile segments with auxin causes acidification of the growth medium. Treatments that block acidification by auxin also block auxin-induced growth. It was suggested that hydrogen ions secreted into the cell wall as a result of auxin action might activate one or more proteins in the wall. Proteins called expansins, isolated from plant cell walls in the 1990s, were found to cause the extension of isolated cell walls of several species. Expansins are widespread among land plants. Expansin action is pH-dependent, and the expansins appear to be activated by hydrogen ions. These proteins apparently modify hydrogen bonding between polysaccharides in the plant cell wall. The changed hydrogen bonding pattern may allow the polysaccharide macromolecules to slip past each other, so that the wall stretches and the cell expands.37.5.8 Plants contain specific auxin receptor proteins 657The initial step in the action of any plant hormone is the binding of the hormone to specific receptor proteins. Several proteins can bind various plant hormones, but some of this binding may be nonspecific. It must be shown that auxin-binding proteins actually mediate the effects of auxin. Plant molecular biologists showed that the protein ABP1 (Auxin-Binding Protein 1) functions as an auxin receptor. They inserted the ABP1 gene of Arabidopsis into other species and then induced the expression of the gene in cells that normally show a limited response to auxin. Upon expression of the inserted ABP1 gene, the cells showed greater responses to both endogenous and applied auxin. Subsequent work has conclusively shown the existence and importance of other auxin receptor proteins. Given the number of processes regulated by auxin, it is hardly surprising that there appear to be multiple receptors and signal transduction pathways for this hormone.37.5.9 Auxin and other hormones evoke differentiation and organ formation 658What plant substance signals the different types of cells and organs to form? Much of the research on such questions has been done with plant tissues grown in culture outside the plant body. One easily grown tissue is pith-the spongy, innermost tissue of a stem. Pith tissue cultures proliferate rapidly, but show no differentiation. All the cells are similar and unspecialized; they grow into a lump on the surface of a culture medium. Cutting a notch in the cultured pith tissue and inserting a stem tip into the notch causes the pith cells below the inserted tip to differentiate. Some of them differentiate to form water-conducting xylem cells. Differentiation of pith cells can also be initiated by adding to the notch a mixture of auxin and coconut milk (a rich source of plant hormones). A similar effect can be observed in intact plants. If notches are cut in the stems of Coleus blumei plants, interrupting some of the strands of vascular tissue, the strands gradually regenerate from the upper side of the cut to the lower (recall that auxin moves from the tip to the base of a stem). If the leaves above the cut are removed, regeneration is slowed. However, when the missing leaves are replaced with an auxin solution, vascular tissue regenerates. Auxin and other plant hormones signal the formation of specific cell types. Experiments with cultured tissues have helped clarify which hormones control organ formation. Undifferentiated cultures of tobacco pith form roots when treated with an appropriate concentration of auxin. Another group of hormones-the cytokinins-causes buds and then shoots to form in such cultures. The pattern of organ formation depends on the ratio of auxin to cytokinin in the medium. A high proportion of auxin favors roots, and a high proportion of cytokinins favors buds, but both processes are most active when both hormones are present. 37.6 Cytokinins Are Active from Seed to Senescence 658Besides stimulating bud formation, the cytokinins promote cell division in cultured plant tissues, an activity that led to their discovery. In addition, cytokinins aid germination, inhibit stem elongation, stimulate lateral bud growth, and delay leaf senescence. Cytokinins are derivatives of adenine. In studies of plant cell division, botanists discovered a substance that powerfully stimulated cell division in tissue cultures. This compound, kinetin, consists of adenine with an attached group. We now know that kinetin is just one of a family of compounds, which are now called cytokinins. Kinetin may be considered a synthetic cytokinin, because it has never been isolated from plant tissue. However, two closely related compounds, called zeatin and isopentenyl adenine, occur naturally in plants. Cytokinins form primarily in the roots and move to other parts of the plant. They have several effects: Cytokinins add an appropriate combination of auxin and cytokinins to a growth medium yields rapid growth of plant tissues. Cytokinins can cause certain light-requiring seeds to germinate when the seeds are kept in constant darkness. cytokinins usually inhibit the elongation of stems, but they cause lateral swelling of stems and roots (the fleshy roots of radishes are an extreme example). Cytokinins stimulate lateral buds to grow into branches; thus the balance between auxin and cytokinin levels controls the bushiness of a plant. Cytokinins increase the expansion of cut pieces of leaf tissue, and may regulate normal leaf expansion. Cytokinins delay the senescence of leaves. If leaf blades are detached from a plant and floated on water or a nutrient solution, they quickly turn yellow and show other signs of senescence. If instead they are floated on a solution containing a cytokinin, they remain green and senesce much more slowly. 37.7 Ethylene: A Gaseous Hormone That Promotes Senescence 658Whereas the cytokinins oppose or delay senescence, another plant hormone promotes it. This hormone is the gas ethylene, which is sometimes called the senescence hormone. Ethylene can be produced by all parts of the plant, and like all plant hormones, it has several effects. Back when streets were lit by gas rather than by electricity, leaves on trees near street lamps abscised earlier than those on trees farther from the lamps. We now know that ethylene, a combustion product of the illuminating gas, is what caused the abscission. Auxin delays leaf abscission, but ethylene strongly promotes it; thus a balance of auxin and ethylene controls abscission.37.7.1 Ethylene hastens the ripening of fruit 659By promoting senescence, ethylene speeds the ripening of fruit. The old saying "one rotten apple spoils the barrel" is true. That rotten apple is a rich source of ethylene, which speeds the ripening and subsequent rotting of the others in the barrel. As the fruit ripens, it loses chlorophyll and its cell walls break down. Ethylene produced in the fruit tissue promotes both processes. Ethylene also causes an increase in its own production. Thus, once ripening begins, more and more ethylene forms, and because it is a gas, it diffuses readily throughout the fruit and even to neighboring fruits on the same or other plants. Farmers in ancient times used to slash developing figs to hasten their ripening. We now know that wounding causes an increase in ethylene production by the fruit, and that the raised ethylene level promotes ripening. Today commercial shippers and storers of fruit hasten ripening by adding ethylene to storage chambers. This use of ethylene is the single most important use of a plant hormone in agriculture and commerce. Ripening can also be delayed by the use of "scrubbers" and adsorbents to remove ethylene from the atmosphere in fruit storage chambers. As flowers senesce, their petals may abscise, to the detriment of the cut-flower industry. Florists or their suppliers often spray their flowers with dilute solutions of silver thiosulfate. Silver salts inhibit ethylene action, probably by interacting directly with the ethylene receptor, and thus delay senescence-enabling florists to keep their wares salable longer. 37.7.2 Ethylene affects stems in several ways 659Although associated primarily with senescence, ethylene is active at other stages of plant development as well. The stems of many eudicot seedlings form an apical hook that protects the delicate shoot apex while the stem grows through the soil. The apical hook is maintained through an asymmetrical production of ethylene gas, which inhibits the elongation of cells on the inner surface of the hook. Once the seedling breaks through the soil surface and is exposed to light, ethylene synthesis stops, and the cells of the inner surface are no longer inhibited. These cells now elongate, and the hook opens, raising the shoot apex and expanding leaves into the sun. Ethylene also inhibits stem elongation in general, promotes lateral swelling of stems (as do the cytokinins), and causes stems to lose their sensitivity to gravitropic stimulation.37.7.3 The ethylene signal transduction pathway is well understood 659Analysis of Arabidopsis mutants has revealed the steps in the mechanism of ethylene action. Some of these mutants do not respond to applied ethylene, and others act as if they have been exposed to ethylene even though they haven't. Studies of genes from these mutants and their protein products, coupled with comparisons of their amino acid sequences with those of other known proteins, have revealed some of the details of the signal transduction pathway through which ethylene produces its effects. The pathway includes two membrane proteins: The first is an ethylene receptor (ETR1), and the second is a channel (EIN2) that acts through a second messenger to activate a transcription factor that turns on genes. The resolution of this pathway has been one of the high points of plant biological research over the last 30 years. 37.8 Abscisic Acid: The Stress Hormone 660Abscisic acid is another hormone that has multiple effects in the living plant. During embryo formation, abscisic acid promotes the accumulation of storage proteins in seeds by allowing the expression of the genes that encode those proteins. It is generally present in high concentrations in dormant buds and some dormant seeds, and it is the most common inhibitor of seed germination. Abscisic acid also inhibits stem elongation. It is sometimes referred to as the stress hormone of plants because it accumulates when plants are deprived of water and because of its possible role in maintaining the winter dormancy of buds. Some mutant corn plants, called vp mutants, have seeds that germinate while still attached to the cob, on the intact plant-a condition called vivipary. Several vp mutants are naturally deficient in abscisic acid, and a different kind of vp mutant fails to respond in any way to applied abscisic acid. Applying abscisic acid to the abscisic acid-deficient mutants reduces their tendency to show vivipary. The results of applying abscisic acid to both kinds of mutants indicate that it is the inhibitor that normally prevents seeds from germinating on the plant rather than in the soil. Abscisic acid also regulates gas and water vapor exchange between leaves and the atmosphere through its effects on the guard cells of the leaf stomata (see Chapter 35). Abscisic acid causes stomata to close, and it also prevents stomatal opening normally caused by light. Both of these processes involve ion channels in the plasma membrane of the guard cells. The first response of a guard cell to abscisic acid is the opening of calcium channels and the entry of calcium into the cell. This calcium causes the cell's vacuole to release calcium, too. The increased concentration of calcium leads to a chain of events that result in the opening of potassium channels and the release of K+ and of water, and the closing of the stoma as the guard cells sag together.37.9 Hormones in Plant Defenses 660When bacteria, viruses, or fungi attack a plant, the plant responds in several ways, as we will see in Chapter 39. One of its first responses is to release hormones called oligosaccharins. These hormones, as their name implies, are oligosaccharides-compounds consisting of a few sugar or derivative sugar units. They are actually fragments of the cell wall, which are released when enzymes from an attacker degrade it. They act as signals that trigger the plant's defenses. Because auxin modifies the cell wall, it is not surprising that auxin, too, causes the release of oligosaccharins. The interactions between auxin and oligosaccharins may be complex. One oligosaccharin, at an extremely low concentration, has been found to inhibit auxin-induced growth promotion. Other oligosaccharins may regulate aspects of cell differentiation. Three other hormones-jasmonates, salicylic acid, and systemin-serve as important signals in plant defenses. Their activities will be discussed in Chapter 39. 37.11 Light and Photoreceptors 661The length of the night determines the onset of winter dormancy. As summer wears on, the days become shorter (that is, the nights become longer). Leaves have a mechanism for measuring the length of the night, as we will see in the next chapter. Measuring night length is an accurate way to determine the season of the year. If a plant determined the season by the temperature, it could be fooled by a winter warm spell or by unseasonably cold weather in the summer. The length of the night, on the other hand, is determined by Earth's rotation around the sun and does not vary. Plants use the environmental cue of night length to time several aspects of their growth and development. Length of the night is one of several environmental cues detected by plants, or by individual parts such as leaves. Light-its presence or absence, its intensity, its color, and its duration-provides cues to various conditions. Temperature, too, provides important environmental cues, both by its value at any particular time and by the distribution of warmer and colder stretches over a period of time. The plant "reads" an environmental cue and then "interprets" it, often by stepping up or decreasing its production of hormones. We'll discuss an example of a temperature cue in the next chapter. Here, we'll see how certain photoreceptors interpret light, its duration, and its wavelength distribution. Light regulates many aspects of plant development in addition to phototropism. The affected processes range from seed germination to shoot elongation to the initiation of flowering. Several photoreceptors take part in these and other processes. Five phytochromes mediate the effects of red and dim blue light. Three or more blue-light receptors, discovered more recently, mediate the effects of higher-intensity blue light.37.11.1 Phytochromes mediate the effects of red and far-red light 661Some seeds will not germinate in darkness, but do so readily after even a brief exposure to light. Blue and red light are highly effective in promoting germination, whereas green light is not. Of particular importance to plants is the fact that far-red light reverses the effect of a prior exposure to red light. Far-red light is a very deep red, bordering on the limit of human vision and centered on a wavelength of 730 nm; red wavelengths are around 660 nm. If exposed to brief, alternating periods of red and far-red light in close succession, lettuce seeds respond only to the final exposure: If it is red, they germinate; if it is far-red, they remain dormant. This reversibility of the effects of red and far-red light regulates many other aspects of plant development, including flowering and seedling growth. The basis for the red and far-red effects resides in certain bluish photoreceptor proteins called phytochromes. They are blue because they absorb red and far-red light and transmit other light. In the cytosol of plants are two interconvertible forms of phytochromes. Light drives the interconversion of the two forms. The form that absorbs principally red light is called Pr. Upon absorption of a photon of red light, a molecule of Pr is converted into Pfr. The Pfr form absorbs far-red light; when it does so, it is converted to Pr.  Pfr has some important biological effects. As we have just seen, one of them is to initiate germination in certain seeds, such as lettuce.37.11.2 Phytochromes have many effects 662Phytochromes help to regulate a seedling's early growth. The radicle, or embryonic root, is the first portion of the seedling to escape the seed coat; the shoot emerges later. When seeds germinate in the dark below the soil surface, a pale and spindly seedling forms, with undeveloped leaves. Such an etiolated plant cannot carry out photosynthesis. The seedling shoot must reach the soil surface and begin photosynthesis before its nutrient reserves are expended and it starves. Plants have evolved a variety of ways to cope with the problem of germinating underground. Etiolated flowering plants, for example, do not form chlorophyll. They turn green only when exposed to light, thereby conserving the resources needed to make chlorophyll, which would be useless in the dark. An etiolated shoot uses stored resources to elongate rapidly and hasten its arrival at the soil surface, where photosynthesis quickly begins. To break through soil yet protect delicate, underdeveloped leaves, the shoot of an etiolated eudicot seedling forms an apical hook. All of these etiolation phenomena (lack of chlorophyll, rapid shoot elongation, production of an apical hook, delayed leaf expansion) are regulated by the phytochromes. In a seedling that has never been exposed to light, all the phytochrome is in the red-absorbing (Pr) form. Exposure to light converts Pr to Pfr (the far-red-absorbing form), and the Pfr initiates reversal of the etiolation phenomena: Chlorophyll synthesis begins, shoot elongation slows, the apeical hook straightens out, and the leaves start to expand.37.11.3 There are multiple phytochromes 662For years, plant biologists had difficulty accounting for some aspects of phytochrome action. A solution to these problems may lie in the discovery of multiple forms of phytochromes and other photoreceptors. Arabidopsis has five genes that encode different phytochromes, and this diversity has been found throughout the plant kingdom and in algae as well. The several phytochromes may play differing roles in various phytochrome-controlled responses. Some of them may even play off each other to fine-tune plant growth during the day. Consider, for example, the light spectrum available to a seedling that is growing in the shade of other plants. Because chlorophyll in the leaves above it absorbs the light first, the shaded seedling "sees" a spectrum relatively rich in far-red (and poor in red); the ratio of far-red to red is increased as much as 10-fold to 20-fold in the shade. The interplay among signal transduction pathways initiated by the different phytochromes may lead to an increased rate of stem elongation that tends to bring the leaf into full sunlight. We do not yet know how the various phytochromes produce their many effects, although it is evident that phytochromes act through the plant's genome. Phytochromes appear to activate one or more G proteins. G proteins are membrane proteins that must bind to guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to exert their effects (see Chapter 15). The phytochrome-activated G proteins may convert GTP into the second messenger cGMP (cyclic guanosine monophosphate) and open channels that admit calcium ions into the cell, where they bind to the protein calmodulin. Both cGMP and the calcium-calmodulin complex can trigger changes leading eventually to the activation of specific genes.37.11.4 Cryptochromes and phototropin are blue-light receptors 662Cryptochromes are yellow photoreceptor pigments that absorb blue and ultraviolet light. They affect some of the same developmental processes, including seedling development and flowering, as do phytochromes. Unlike phytochromes, cryptochromes are present and play important roles in animals as well as plants. In contrast to phytochromes, cryptochromes are located primarily in the plant nucleus. The exact mechanism of cryptochrome action is not yet known. It may be significant that phytochromes behave like protein kinases, and that cryptochromes can be substrates of such enzymes. It is likely that both classes of photoreceptors participate in protein kinase-based signaling pathways (see Chapter 15).We began this chapter with a photo of a plant's phototropic response. Later we saw that the study of phototropism led to the discovery of auxin. But a question remained: What is the photoreceptor for phototropism? Plant scientists working with phototropic mutants of Arabidopsis have recently showed convincing evidence that it is a yellow protein, which they named phototropin. Upon absorbing blue light, phototropin initiates a signal transduction pathway leading to phototropic curvature. Still another type of blue-light receptor may be responsible for the light-induced closure of stomata. Plants respond to light in many ways, and their responses are mediated by interactions of several photoreceptors, as we have seen. In, another yellow protein, is the photoreceptor for phototropism. 38 Reproduction in Flowering PlantsBiologists have known for more than 60 years that the leaves of some plants, such as the cocklebur, contain built-in timers that measure the length of every night. When the night is of the appropriate length, the leaves-even a single leaf on a plant stripped of all other leaves-send a signal to other parts of the plant, telling them to form flowers. The evidence for this signal is substantial and convincing, yet nobody has been able to isolate and identify it. After years of frustration, we may soon solve this mystery. The probable key lies in recent discoveries, described earlier in this book, about the functioning of plasmodesmata, the minute passageways connecting adjacent plant cells. Studies using mutant plants may allow scientists to identify the signal and learn how it triggers flowering. This knowledge will be a major advance in our understanding of reproduction in plants. Why do plants expend energy and resources to produce flowers? The answer is simple: Flowers are sexual reproductive structures, and reproduction is one of the most important events in a plant's-or any organism's-life. In this chapter we look at several aspects of plant reproduction, including some that are still not well understood. We contrast sexual and asexual reproduction, and we consider sexual reproduction in detail. In doing so, we look at angiosperm gametophytes, pollination, double fertilization, embryonic development, and the roles of fruits in seed dispersal. The transition to the flowering state is a key event in plant development, and we'll see how changing seasons trigger flowering in some plants-and speculate on the existence of a flowering hormone. We conclude the chapter with an examination of asexual reproduction in nature and in agriculture. 38.1 Many Ways to ReproducePlants have many ways of reproducing themselves-and with humans helping, there are even more ways. Flowers contain the sex organs of plants; it is thus no surprise that almost all flowering plants reproduce sexually. But many reproduce asexually as well; some even reproduce asexually most of the time.What are the advantages and disadvantages of these two kinds of reproduction? The answers to this question involve genetic recombination. As we have seen, sexual reproduction produces new genetic combinations and diverse phenotypes. Asexual reproduction, in contrast, produces a clone of genetically identical individuals. Both sexual and asexual reproduction are important in agriculture. Many important annual crops are grown from seeds, which are the products of sexual reproduction. Seed-grown crops include wheat, rice, millet, and corn-the great grain crops, all of which are grasses-as well as plants in other families, such as soybeans and safflower. Other crops are produced asexually from grafts, or by other asexual means.Orange trees, which have been under cultivation for centuries, can be grown from seed-except for one type, the navel orange. This plant apparently arose only once in history. Early in the nineteenth century, on a plantation on the Brazilian coast, one seed gave rise to one tree that had aberrant flowers. Parts of the flowers aborted, and seedless fruits formed. Every navel orange in the world comes from a navel orange tree derived asexually from that original Brazilian tree. Asexual reproduction is the only way of propagating this plant. Unlike navel oranges, strawberries need not be propagated asexually, because they are capable of forming seeds. Nonetheless, asexual propagation of strawberries is common because vast numbers of plants that are genetically identical to a particularly desirable plant can be produced in this way. We will treat asexual reproduction in greater detail at the end of this chapter. We begin, however, by considering sexual reproduction. 38.2 Sexual ReproductionSexual reproduction provides genetic diversity through recombination (see Chapter 9). Meiosis and mating shuffle genes into new combinations, giving a population a variety of genotypes in each generation. This genetic diversity may serve the population well as the environment changes or as the population expands into new environments. The adaptability resulting from genetic diversity is the major advantage of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction.38.2.1 The flower is an angiosperm's device for sexual reproductionA complete flower consists of four groups of organs that are modified leaves: the carpels, stamens, petals, and sepals. The carpels and stamens are, respectively, the female and male sex organs. A pistil is a structure composed of one or more carpels. The base of the pistil, called the ovary, contains one or more ovules, each of which contains a megasporangium. The stalk of the pistil is the style, and the end of that stalk is the stigma. Each stamen is composed of a filament bearing a two-lobed anther, which consists of four microsporangia fused together. The petals and sepals of many flowers are arranged in whorls (circles) around the carpels and stamens. Together, the petals constitute the corolla. Below them, the sepals constitute the calyx. The petals are often colored; the sepals are often green and photosynthetic. All the parts of the flower are borne on a stem tip, the receptacle.38.2.2 Flowering plants have microscopic gametophytesBefore reading this section, you may wish to review the section in Chapter 28 entitled "Life cycles of plants feature alternation of generations." The concept of alternation of generations is central to an understanding of plant reproduction. In plants, the sporophyte generation produces flowers.  The flowers produce spores, which develop into tiny gametophytes. This strategy is a unique one employed only by plants and some protists. The flower is more than just a place where the egg and sperm are eventually found-it is also the place where the alternate generation resides. The gametophytes-the gamete-producing generation-of flowering plants develop from haploid spores in sporangia within the flower. Female gametophytes (megagametophytes), which are called embryo sacs, develop in megasporangia. Male gametophytes (microgametophytes), which are called pollen grains, develop in microsporangia. Within the ovule, a megasporocyte-a cell within the megasporangium-divides meiotically to produce four haploid megaspores. All but one of these megaspores then degenerate. The surviving megaspore undergoes mitotic divisions, usually producing eight haploid nuclei, all initially contained within a single cell-three nuclei at one end, three at the other, and two in the middle. Subsequent cell wall formation leads to an elliptical, seven-celled megagametophyte with a total of eight nuclei. At one end of the elliptical megagametophyte are three tiny cells: the egg and two cells called synergids. The egg is the female gamete, and the synergids participate indirectly in fertilization. At the opposite end of the megagametophyte are three antipodal cells, which eventually degenerate.In the large central cell are two polar nuclei.The embryo sac  is the entire seven-celled, eight-nucleus structure. The male gametophyte, or pollen grain, consists of fewer cells than the female gametophyte. The development of a pollen grain begins when a microsporocyte within the anther divides meiotically. Each resulting haploid microspore normally undergoes one mitotic division within the spore wall before the anthers open and release these two-celled pollen grains. Further development of the pollen grain, which we will describe shortly, is delayed until the pollen arrives at a stigma. In angiosperms, the transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma is referred to as pollination.38.2.3 Pollination enables fertilization in the absence of liquid waterGymnosperms and angiosperms evolved independence from liquid water as a medium for gamete travel and fertilization-a freedom not shared by other plant groups. The male gametes of gymnosperms and angiosperms travel within pollen grains. But how do angiosperm pollen grains travel from an anther to a stigma? Many different mechanisms that have evolved for pollen transport. In some plants, such as peas and their relatives, pollination is accomplished before the flower bud opens. Pollen is transferred by the direct contact of anther and stigma within the same flower, resulting in self-fertilization. Wind is the vehicle for pollen transport in many species, especially grasses. Wind-pollinated flowers have sticky or featherlike stigmas, and they produce pollen grains in great numbers. Some aquatic angiosperms are pollinated by water action, with water carrying pollen grains from plant to plant. Animals, including insects, birds, and bats, carry pollen among the flowers of many plants.38.2.4 Some plants practice "mate selection"In our discussion of Mendel's work (see Chapter 10), we saw that some plants can reproduce sexually either by cross-pollinating or by self-pollinating. Many plants demonstrate self-incompatibility; that is, they reject pollen from their own flowers. This rejection promotes genetic variation and limits inbreeding. A single gene, the S gene, is responsible for self-incompatibility. The S gene has dozens of alleles. A pollen grain is haploid and possesses a single S allele; the recipient stigma is diploid. In self-incompatible plants, pollen fails to germinate, or develops abnormally, on a stigma that possesses the same S allele. The stigma plays an important role in "mate selection" by flowering plants. The stigmas of wind-pollinated plants are exposed to the pollen of many other species as well as their own, and even the flowers of plants with coevolved, specific animal pollinators may receive pollen from other plant species. Pollen from the same species binds strongly to the stigma due to cell-cell signaling by the cell wall of conspecific pollen grains. In contrast, foreign pollen falls off readily, without germinating.38.2.5 A pollen tube delivers male cells to the embryo sacWhen a pollen grain lands on the stigma of a compatible pistil, a pollen tube develops from the pollen grain. The pollen tube either digests its way through the spongy tissue of the style or, if the style is hollow, grows downward on the inner surface of this female organ. The pollen tube grows millimeters or even centimeters in the process. The rapid growth of the pollen tube requires calcium ions, taken up at the growing tip of the tube, as well as cell adhesion  proteins. The downward growth of the pollen tube is guided by a long-distance signal from the ovule.38.2.6 Angiosperms perform double fertilizationThe pollen grain consists of two cells. The larger tube cell encloses the much smaller generative cell. Guided by the tube cell nucleus, the pollen tube eventually grows through megasporangial tissue and reaches the embryo sac. The generative cell meanwhile has undergone one mitotic division and cytokinesis to produce two sperm cells. Both of the sperm cells enter the embryo sac,  where they are released into the cytoplasm of one of the synergids. This synergid degenerates, releasing the sperm cells. Each sperm cell then fuses with a different cell of the embryo sac. One sperm cell fuses with the egg cell, producing the diploid zygote. The other fuses with the central cell, and that sperm cell nucleus and the two polar nuclei unite to form a triploid (3n) nucleus. While the zygote nucleus begins division to form the new sporophyte embryo, the triploid nucleus undergoes rapid mitosis to form a specialized nutritive tissue, the endosperm. The antipodal cells and the remaining synergid eventually degenerate, as does the pollen tube nucleus. The fusion of a sperm cell nucleus with polar nuclei to form endosperm takes place only in angiosperms. This and the possession of flowers are the two most definitive characteristics shared by all angiosperms.38.2.7 Embryos develop within seedsShortly after fertilization, highly coordinated growth and development of embryo, endosperm, integuments, and carpel ensues. The integuments develop into a double-layered seed coat, and the carpel ultimately becomes the wall of the fruit that encloses the seed. The first step in the normal formation of the embryo is a mitotic division of the zygote-the fertilized egg-giving rise to two daughter cells. Even at this stage, the two cells face different fates. An asymmetrical (uneven) distribution of cytoplasm within the zygote causes one end to produce the embryo proper and the other end to produce a supporting structure, the suspensor. The suspensor pushes the embryo against or into the endosperm, and it also provides one route by which nutrients enter the embryo. With the asymmetrical division of the zygote, polarity has been established, as has the longitudinal axis of the new plant. A filamentous suspensor and a globular embryo are distinguishable after just four mitotic divisions. The suspensor soon ceases to elongate. In the embryo, the primary meristems form. As development continues, the first organs take form within the embryo. In eudicots (monocots are somewhat different), the initially globular embryo takes on a characteristic heart-shaped form as the cotyledons start to grow. Further elongation of the cotyledons and of the main axis of the embryo gives rise to what is called the torpedo stage, during which some of the internal tissues begin to differentiate. The elongating region below the cotyledons is the hypocotyl. At the top of the hypocotyl, between the cotyledons, is the shoot apex; at the other end is the root apex. Each of these apical regions contains an apical meristem whose dividing cells will give rise to the organs of the mature plant. Large amounts of nutrients are moved in from other parts of the plant, and the endosperm accumulates starch, lipids, and proteins. In many species, the cotyledons absorb the nutrient reserves from the surrounding endosperm and grow very large in relation to the rest of the embryo. In others, the cotyledons remain thin; they draw on the reserves in the endosperm as needed when the seed germinates. In the late stages of embryonic development, the seed loses water-sometimes as much as 95 percent of its original water content. In its dried state, the embryo is incapable of further development. It remains in this quiescent state until the conditions are right for germination. (Recall from Chapter 37 that a necessary first step in seed germination is the massive imbibition of water.)38.2.8 Some fruits assist in seed dispersalAfter fertilization, the ovary wall of a flowering plant-together with its seeds-develops into a fruit. A fruit may consist of only the mature ovary and its seeds, or it may include other parts of the flower or structures that are closely related to it. Some major variations on this theme shows only fleshy, edible fruits. Many other fruits are dry or inedible. Some fruits help disperse seeds over substantial distances. Various trees, including ash, elm, maple, and tree of heaven, produce a dry, winged fruit that may be blown some distance from the parent tree by the wind. Water disperses some fruits; coconuts have been spread in this way from island to island in the Pacific. Still other fruits travel by hitching rides with animals-either inside or outside them. Fleshy fruits such as berries provide food for mammals or birds; their seeds travel safely through the animal's digestive tract and are deposited some distance from the parent plant. We have traced the sexual life cycle from the flower to the fruit to the dispersal of seeds. We discussed seed germination and vegetative development of the seedling in Chapter 37. Now let's complete the sexual life cycle by considering the transition from the vegetative to the flowering state, and how this transition is regulated. 38.3 The Transition to the Flowering StateFlowering may terminate, interrupt, or accompany vegetative growth.  The transition to the flowering state marks the end of vegetative growth for some plants. If we view a plant as something produced by a seed for the purpose of bearing more seeds, then the act of flowering is one of the supreme events in a plant's life.38.3.1 Apical meristems can become inflorescence meristemsThe first visible sign of the transition to the flowering state may be a change in one or more apical meristems in the shoot system. During vegetative growth, an apical meristem continually produces leaves, lateral buds, and internodes (regions of stem between the nodes where leaves and buds form. This unrestricted growth is indeterminate (see Chapter 34). Flowers may appear singly or in an orderly cluster that constitutes a structure called an inflorescence. If a vegetative meristem becomes an inflorescence meristem, it generally produces several other structures: smaller leafy structures called bracts, as well as new meristems in the angles between the bracts and the internodes. These new meristems may also be inflorescence meristems, or they may be floral meristems, which give rise to the flowers themselves. Each floral meristem typically produces four consecutive whorls of organs-the sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels-separated by very short internodes, keeping the flower compact. In contrast to vegetative meristems and some inflorescence meristems, floral meristems are responsible for determinate growth-the limited growth of the flower to a particular size and form.38.3.2 A cascade of gene expression leads to floweringHow do apical meristems become inflorescence meristems, and how do inflorescence meristems give rise to floral meristems? How does a floral meristem give rise, in short order, to four different organs? How does each flower come to have the correct number of each of the floral organs? Numerous genes collaborate to produce these results. We'll refer here to some of the genes whose actions have been most thoroughly understood in Arabidopsis and snapdragons. In order for an inflorescence meristem to give rise to a floral meristem, a group of floral meristem identity genes must be expressed. Expression of these genes initiates a cascade of further gene expression. Another set of genes, part of this cascade, participates in pattern formation-the spatial organization of the whorls of organs, which are still to be determined. These genes, in turn, trigger the expression of a group of organ identity genes that work in concert to specify the successive whorls. They are homeotic genes, and their products are transcription factors that mediate the expression of still further genes. Now that we have seen how flowering occurs, we will consider how the transition from the vegetative to the flowering state is initiated. 38.4 Photoperiodic Control of FloweringThe life cycles of flowering plants fall into three categories: annual, biennial, and perennial. Annuals, such as many food crops, complete their life cycle (seed to flower) in less than a year. Biennials, such as carrots and cabbage, grow for all or part of one year and live on into a second year, during which they flower, form seeds, and die. Perennials, such as oak trees, live for a few to many years, during which both growth and flowering occur. What control systems give rise to these and other differences in flowering behavior? In 1920, W. W. Garner and H. A. Allard of the U.S. Department of Agriculture studied the behavior of a newly discovered mutant tobacco plant. The mutant, named Maryland Mammoth, had large leaves and exceptional height. When the other plants in the field flowered, the Maryland Mammoth continued to grow. Garner and Allard took cuttings of the Maryland Mammoth into their greenhouse, and the plants that grew from the cuttings finally flowered in December. Garner and Allard guessed that this pattern had something to do with the seasons. They tested several likely seasonal variables, such as temperature, but the key variable proved to be the length of the day (as they saw it). By moving plants between light and dark rooms at different times to vary the day length artificially, they were able to establish a direct link between flowering and day length. (We now know that the key variable is the length of the night, rather than the day, but Garner and Allard did not make that distinction.) The Maryland Mammoth plants did not flower if the light period was longer than 14 hours each day, but flowering commenced after the days became shorter than 14 hours. Thus, the critical day length for Maryland Mammoth tobacco is 14 hours. This phenomenon of control by the length of day or night is called photoperiodism.38.4.1 There are short-day, long-day, and day-neutral plantsPoinsettias, chrysanthemums, and Maryland Mammoth tobacco are short-day plants (SDP's), which flower only when the day is shorter than a critical maximum. Spinach and clover are examples of long-day plants (LDP's), which flower only when the day is longer than a critical minimum. Generally, LDP's are triggered to flower in midsummer and SDP's in late summer, or sometimes in the spring. Some plants require photoperiodic signals that are more complex than just short or long days in order to flower. One group, the short-long-day plants, must first experience short days and then long ones. Accordingly, white clover and other short-long-day plants flower during the long days before midsummer. Another group, the long-short-day plants, cannot flower until the long days of summer have been followed by shorter ones, so they bloom only in the fall. Kalanchoe, is a long-short-day plant. Other effects besides flowering are also under photoperiodic control. We have learned, for example, that short days trigger the onset of winter dormancy in plants. (Animals, too, show a variety of photoperiodic behaviors.) The flowering of some angiosperms, such as corn and tomatoes, is not photoperiodic. In fact, there are more of these day-neutral plants than there are short-day and long-day plants. Some plants are photoperiodically sensitive only when young and become day-neutral as they grow older. Others require specific combinations of day length and other factors-especially temperature-to flower.38.4.2 The length of the night determines whether a plant will flowerThe terms "short-day plant" and "long-day plant" became entrenched before scientists learned that plants actually measure the length of the night, or of a period of darkness, rather than the length the of day. This fact was demonstrated by Karl Hamner of the University of California at Los Angeles and James Bonner of the California Institute of Technology. Working with cocklebur, an SDP, Hamner and Bonner ran a series of experiments using two sets of conditions: 1) The light period was kept constant-either shorter or longer than the critical day length-and the dark period was varied; 2) The dark period was kept constant, and the light period was varied. The plants flowered under all treatments in which the dark period exceeded 9 hours, regardless of the length of the light period. Thus it is the length of the night that matters; for cocklebur, the critical night length is about 9 hours. Thus, it would be more accurate to call cocklebur a "long-night plant" than a short-day plant.In cocklebur, a single long night is enough of a photoperiodic stimulus to trigger full flowering some days later, even if the intervening nights are short ones. Most plants are less sensitive than cocklebur, requiring from two to many nights of appropriate length to induce flowering. For some plants, a single shorter night in a series of long ones, even one day before flowering would have commenced, inhibits flowering. Hamner and Bonner showed that plants measure the length of the night using another method as well. They grew SDP's and LDP's under a variety of light conditions. Under some conditions, the dark period was interrupted by a brief exposure to light; in others, the light period was interrupted briefly by darkness. Interruptions of the light period by darkness had no effect on the flowering of either short-day or long-day plants. Even very brief interruptions of the dark period by light, however, completely nullified the effect of a long night. An SDP flowered only if the long nights were uninterrupted. An LDP experiencing long nights flowered if those nights were broken by exposure to light. Thus a plant must have a timing mechanism that measures the length of a continuous dark period. Despite much study, the nature of this timing mechanism is still unknown. Phytochromes and blue-light receptors, which affect several aspects of plant development (see Chapter 37), also participate in the photoperiodic timing mechanism. In the interrupted-night experiments, the most effective wavelengths of light were in the red range, and the effect of a red-light interruption of the night could be fully reversed by a subsequent exposure to far-red light. It was once thought that the timing mechanism might simply be the slow conversion of phytochrome during the night from the Pfr form-produced during the light hours-to the Pr form. But this suggestion is inconsistent with most of the experimental observations and must be wrong. Phytochrome must be only a photoreceptor. The timekeeping role must be played by a biological clock.38.4.3 Circadian rhythms are maintained by a biological clockIt is abundantly clear that organisms have some way of measuring time, and that they are well adapted to the 24-hour day-night cycle of our planet. Some sort of biological clock resides within the cells of all eukaryotes. The major outward manifestations of this clock are known as circadian rhythms (from the Latin circa, "about," and dies, "day"). Plants provide innumerable examples of approximately 24-hour cycles. The leaflets of a plant such as clover or the tropical tree Albizia normally hang down and fold at night and rise and expand during the day. Flowers of many plants show similar "sleep movements," closing at night and opening during the day. They continue to open and close on an approximately 24-hour cycle even when the light and dark periods are experimentally modified. We can characterize circadian rhythms, as well as other regular biological cycles, in two ways: The period is the length of one cycle, and the amplitude is the magnitude of the change over the course of a cycle. Circadian rhythms of protists, animals, fungi, and plants have been found to share some important characteristics: The period is remarkably insensitive to temperature, although lowering the temperature may drastically reduce the amplitude of the fluctuation. Circadian rhythms are highly persistent; they continue even in an environment in which there is no alternation of light and dark. Circadian rhythms can be entrained, within limits, by light-dark cycles that differ from 24 hours. That is, the period an organism expresses can be made to coincide with that of the light-dark regime. A brief exposure to light can shift the rhythm-it can cause a phase shift.The period of circadian rhythms in nature is approximately 24 hours. If an Albizia tree, for example, were to be placed under electric light on a day-night cycle totaling exactly 24 hours, the rhythm expressed would show a period of exactly 24 hours. However, if an experimenter used a day-night cycle of, say, 22 hours, then over time the rhythm would change-it would be entrained to a 22-hour period. If an organism is maintained under constant darkness, with its circadian rhythm being expressed on the approximately 24-hour period, a brief exposure to light can cause a phase shift-that is, it can make the next peak of activity appear either later or earlierthan  expected, depending on when the exposure is given. Moreover, the organism does not then return to its old schedule if it remains in darkness. If the first peak is delayed by 6 hours, the subsequent peaks are all 6 hours late. Such phase shifts are permanent-until the organism receives more exposures to light. Phytochromes and blue-light receptors  are known to affect the period of the biological clock, with the different pigments reporting on different wavelengths and intensities of light. Perhaps this diversity of photoreceptors is an adaptation to the changes in the light environment that a plant experiences. There is now ample evidence that the photoperiodic behavior of plants is based on the interaction of night length with the biological clock. But how the clock is coupled with flowering remains unclear.38.4.4 Is there a flowering hormone?Is the timing device for flowering located in a particular part of an angiosperm, or are all parts able to sense the length of the night? This question was resolved by "blindfolding" different parts of the plant. It quickly became apparent that each leaf is capable of timing the night. If a short-day plant is kept under a regime of short nights and long days, but a leaf is covered so as to give it the needed long nights, the plant will flower. This type of experiment works best if only one leaf is left on the plant. If one leaf is given a photoperiodic treatment conducive to flowering-an inductive treatment-other leaves kept under noninductive conditions will tend to inhibit flowering. Although it is the leaves that sense an inductive dark period, the flowers form elsewhere on the plant. Thus a message must be sent from the leaf to the site of flower formation. Three lines of evidence suggest that this message is a chemical substance-a flowering hormone. If a photoperiodically induced leaf is removed from the plant shortly after the inductive dark period, the plant does not flower. If, however, the induced leaf remains attached to the plant for several hours, the plant flowers. This result suggests that something must be synthesized in the leaf in response to the inductive dark period, then move out of the leaf to induce flowering. if two cocklebur plants are grafted together, and if one plant is given inductive long nights and its graft partner is given noninductive short nights, both plants flower. if an induced leaf from one plant is grafted onto another, noninduced plant, the host plant flowers. Jan A. D. Zeevaart, a plant physiologist now at Michigan State University, performed this last experiment. He exposed a single leaf of the SDP Perilla to a short-day/long-night regime, inducing the plant to flower. Then he detached this leaf and grafted it onto another, noninduced, Perilla plant-which responded by flowering. The same leaf grafted onto successive hosts caused each of them to flower in turn. As long as 3 months after the leaf was exposed to the short-day/long-night regime, it could still cause plants to flower.Experiments such as Zeevaart's suggest that the photoperiodic induction of a leaf causes a more or less permanent change in it, inducing it to start and continue producing a flowering hormone that is transported to other parts of the plant, switching those target parts to the reproductive state. So reasonable is this idea that biologists have named this hormone florigen, even though, after decades of active searching, it has not been isolated and characterized. An elegant experiment suggested that the florigen of short-day plants is identical to that of long-day plants, even though SDP's produce it only under long nights and LDP's only under short nights. An SDP and an LDP were grafted together, and both flowered, as long as the photoperiodic conditions were inductive for one of the partners. Either the SDP or the LDP could be the one induced, but both would always flower. These results suggest that a flowering hormone-the elusive florigen-was being transferred from one plant to the other. The direct demonstration of florigen activity remains a cherished goal of plant physiologists. For a long time it was thought that florigen could be neither a protein nor an RNA because these molecules were too large to pass from one living plant cell to another. However, we now know that such macromolecules can be transferred by way of plasmodesmata, and biologists are reexamining the possibility that an RNA or protein is the long-sought florigen. 38.5 Vernalization and FloweringIn both wheat and rye, we distinguish two categories of flowering behavior. Spring wheat, for example, is sown in the spring and flowers in the same year. It is an annual plant. Winter wheat is biennial and must be sown in the fall; it flowers in the following summer. If winter wheat is not exposed to cold after its first year, it will not flower normally the next year. The implications of this finding were of great agricultural interest in Russia because winter wheat is a better producer than spring wheat, but it cannot be grown in some parts of Russia because the winters there are too cold for its survival. Several studies performed in Russia during the early 1900s demonstrated that if seeds of winter wheat were premoistened and prechilled, they could be sown in the spring, and would develop and flower normally the same year. Thus, high-yielding winter wheat could be grown even in previously hostile regions. This induction of flowering by low temperatures is called vernalization. Vernalization may require as many as 50 days of low temperatures (in the range from about -2_ to +12_C). Some plant species require both vernalization and long days to flower. There is a long wait from the cold days of winter to the long days of summer, but because the vernalized state easily lasts at least 200 days, these plants do flower when they experience the appropriate night length. 38.6 Asexual ReproductionAlthough sexual reproduction takes up most of the space in this chapter, asexual reproduction is responsible for many of the new plant individuals appearing on Earth. This fact suggests that in some circumstances, asexual reproduction must be advantageous. Consider genetic recombination. When a plant self-fertilizes, there are fewer opportunities for genetic recombination than there are with cross-fertilization. A self-fertilizing plant that is heterozygous for a certain locus can produce among its progeny both kinds of homozygotes for that locus plus the heterozygote, but it cannot produce any progeny that carry alleles that it does not itself possess. Yet many plants continue to be self-compatible. Asexual reproduction goes farther than self-fertilization: It eliminates genetic recombination altogether. When a plant reproduces asexually, it produces a clone of progeny with genotypes identical to its own. If a plant is well adapted to its environment, asexual reproduction may spread its genotype throughout that environment. This ability to exploit a particular environment is an advantage of asexual reproduction.38.6.1 There are many forms of asexual reproductionWe call stems, leaves, and roots vegetative organs, distinguishing them from flowers, the reproductive parts of the plant. The modification of a vegetative organ is what makes vegetative reproduction possible. The stem is the organ that is modified in many cases. Strawberries and some grasses produce stolons (runners), horizontal stems that form roots at intervals and establish potentially independent plants. Tip layers are upright branches whose tips sag to the ground and put out roots, as in blackberry and forsythia. Some plants, such as potatoes, form tubers, enlarged fleshy tips of underground stems 4a). Rhizomes are horizontal underground stems that can give rise to new shoots. Bamboo is a striking example of a plant that reproduces vegetatively by means of rhizomes. A single bamboo plant can give rise to a stand-even a forest-of plants constituting a single, physically connected entity. Whereas stolons and rhizomes are horizontal stems, bulbs and corms are short, vertical, underground stems. Lilies and onions form bulbs, short stems with many fleshy, modified leaves. The leaves make up most of the bulb. Bulbs are thus large buds that store nutrients. They can give rise to new plants by dividing or by producing new bulbs from lateral buds. Crocuses, gladioli, and many other plants produce corms, underground stems that function very much as bulbs do. Corms are disclike and consist primarily of stem tissue; they lack the fleshy modified leaves that are characteristic of bulbs.Not all vegetative organs modified for reproduction are stems. Leaves may also be the source of new plantlets, as in the succulent plants of the genus Kalanchoe. Many kinds of angiosperms, ranging from grasses to trees such as aspens and poplars, form interconnected, genetically homogeneous populations by means of suckers-shoots produced by roots. What appears to be a whole stand of aspen trees, for example, may be a clone derived from a single tree by suckers. Plants that reproduce vegetatively often grow in physically unstable environments, such as eroding hillsides. Plants with stolons or rhizomes, such as beach grasses, rushes, and sand verbena, are common pioneers on coastal sand dunes. Rapid vegetative reproduction enables these plants, once introduced, not only to multiply but also to survive burial by the shifting sand; in addition, the dunes are stabilized by the extensive network of rhizomes or stolons. Dandelions, citrus trees, and some other plants reproduce by apomixis, the asexual production of seeds. As we have seen, meiosis reduces the number of chromosomes in gametes, and fertilization restores the sporophytic number of chromosomes in the zygote. Some plants can skip over both meiosis and fertilization and still produce seeds. Apomixis produces seeds within the female gametophyte without the mingling and segregation of chromosomes and without the union of gametes. The ovule simply develops into a seed, and the ovary wall develops into a fruit. An apomictic embryo has the sporophytic number (2n) of chromosomes. The result of apomixis is a fruit with seeds that are genetically identical to the parent plant. Interestingly, apomixis sometimes requires pollination. In some apomictic species, a sperm nucleus must combine with the polar nuclei in order for the endosperm to form. In other apomictic species, the pollen provides the signals for embryo and endosperm formation, although neither sperm nucleus participates in fertilization. Pollination and fertilization are not the same thing!38.6.2 Asexual reproduction is important in agricultureFarmers take advantage of some natural forms of vegetative reproduction. Farmers and scientists have also developed new types of asexual reproduction by manipulating plants. One of the oldest methods of vegetative reproduction used in agriculture consists simply of making cuttings of stems, inserting them in soil, and waiting for them to form roots and thus become autonomous plants. The cuttings are usually encouraged to root by treatment with a plant hormone, auxin, as described in Chapter 37. Horticulturists reproduce many woody plants by grafting-attaching a bud or a piece of stem from one plant to the root-bearing stem of another plant. The part of the resulting plant that comes from the root-bearing "host" is called the stock; the part grafted on is called the scion. In order for a graft to succeed, the cambium of the scion must become associated with the cambium of the stock. By cell division, both cambia form masses of wound tissue. If the two masses meet and fuse, the resulting continuous cambium can produce xylem and phloem, allowing transport of water and minerals to the scion and of photosynthate to the stock. Grafts are most often successful when the stock and scion belong to the same or closely related species. Most fruit grown for market in the United States is produced on trees grown from grafts. There are many reasons for grafting plants for fruit production. The most common is the desire to combine a hardy root system with a shoot system that produces the best-tasting fruit. This motive is illustrated by the story of the wine grape Vitis vinifera. In 1863, plant lice of the genus Phylloxera inflicted great damage on the root systems of grapevines in French vineyards. More than 2.5 million acres of vines were destroyed. The problem was overcome by importing V. vinifera plants, which have Phylloxera-resistant root systems, from California. These plants were used as stocks to which French vines were grafted as scions. Thus the fine French grapes could be grown using roots resistant to the lice. (But the battle continues; in recent years, a new strain of Phylloxera has been damaging grapevines in California.)Scientists in universities and industrial laboratories have been developing new ways to produce valuable plant materials via tissue culture. Because many plant cells are totipotent (seeChapter 16), cultures of undifferentiated tissue can give rise to entire plants, as can small pieces of tissue cut directly from a parent plant. Tissue cultures are used commercially to produce orchids, rhododendrons, and many crops without resorting to seeds. Culturing tiny bits of apical meristem can produce plants free of viruses. Because apical meristems lack developed vascular tissues, viruses tend not to enter them. Such meristem cultures have been used to increase the yields of potatoes and other crops. Recombinant DNA techniques applied to tissue cultures can provide plants with capabilities they previously lacked. By causing cells of different types to fuse, one can obtain plants with exciting new combinations of properties. Almost all flowering plants reproduce sexually, and many also reproduce asexually. Both sexual and asexual reproduction are important in agriculture. Sexual reproduction promotes genetic diversity in a population, which may give the population an advantage under changing environmental conditions. The flower is an angiosperm's device for sexual reproduction. flowering plants have microscopic gametophytes that develop in the flowers of the sporophytes. The  megagametophyte is the embryo sac, which typically contains eight nuclei in a total of seven cells. The microgametophyte is the pollen grain, which delivers two sperm cells to the megagametophyte by means of a long pollen tube. pollination enables fertilization in the absence of liquid water. In self-incompatible species, the stigma rejects pollen from the same plant. Angiosperms perform double fertilization: One sperm nucleus fertilizes the egg, forming a zygote, and the other sperm nucleus unites with the two polar nuclei to form a triploid endosperm nucleus.
The zygote develops into an embryo (with an attached suspensor), which remains quiescent in the seed until conditions are right for germination. The endosperm is the nutritive reserve upon which the embryo depends at germination. Flowers develop into seed-containing fruits, which often play important roles in the dispersal of the species. For a vegetatively growing plant to flower, an apical meristem in the shoot system must become an inflorescence meristem, which gives rise to bracts and more meristems. The meristems it produces may become floral meristems or additional inflorescence meristems.  Flowering results from a cascade of gene expression. Organ identity genes are expressed in floral meristems that give rise to sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels. Photoperiodic plants regulate their flowering by measuring the length of light and dark periods. Short-day plants flower when the days are shorter than a species-specific critical day length; long-day plants flower when the days are longer than a critical day length.  some angiosperms have more complex photoperiodic requirements than short-day or long-day plants have, but most are day-neutral. The length of the night is what actually determines whether a photoperiodic plant will flower. Interruption of the nightly dark period by a brief exposure to light undoes the effect of a long night.  The mechanism of photoperiodic control involves a biological clock and phytochromes. Evidence suggests that there is a flowering hormone, called florigen, but the substance has yet to be isolated from any plant. In some plant species, exposure to low temperatures-vernalization-is required for flowering. Asexual reproduction allows rapid multiplication of organisms well suited to their environment. Vegetative reproduction involves the modification of a vegetative organ-usually the stem-for reproduction. Stolons, tip layers, tubers, rhizomes, bulbs, corms, and suckers are means by which plants may reproduce vegetatively. Some plant species produce seeds asexually by apomixis. Agriculturalists use natural and artificial techniques of asexual reproduction to reproduce particularly desirable plants. horticulturists often graft different plants together to take advantage of favorable properties of both stock and scion.  Tissue culture techniques, based on the totipotency of many plant cells, are used to propagate plants asexually, to produce virus-free clones of crop plants, and to manipulate plants by recombinant DNA technology.39 Plant Responses to Environmental ChallengesIf you are attacked, it makes sense to call for help. Plants do this, too. For example, when caterpillars begin to chew on the leaves of corn, cotton, and other species, the plants synthesize and release volatile substances into the atmosphere. These substances attract other insects that feed on the caterpillars. Herbivores ranging from insects to elephants aren't the only challenges plants face. Plants can get sick, too. The environment teems with plant pathogens. We know of more than 100 diseases that can kill a tomato plant, each of them caused by a pathogen-a disease-producing agent that can replicate (including various bacteria, fungi, protists, and viruses). Like animals, plants have a variety of defenses against pathogens. And like the defenses of our bodies, these mechanisms are not perfect, but they keep the plant world in competitive balance with its pathogens. Environmental challenges to plants aren't limited to other organisms and viruses. Some physical environments pose substantial problems and thus drastically limit the places different kinds of plants can live. The most challenging physical environments include ones that are very dry (deserts), ones that are water-saturated and thus limit oxygen, environments that are dangerously salty, ones that contain high concentrations of toxic substances such as heavy metals, and ones that are very hot or very cold. This chapter focuses on how plants meet the myriad challenges presented by their biological and physical environment. We'll begin by examining interactions between plants and pathogens and go on to consider interactions between plants and herbivores. Then we will discuss the adaptations of some types of plants to their physical environments. 39.1 Plant-Pathogen Interactions 679Plants and pathogens evolve together, resulting in complex relationships. Pathogens have evolved mechanisms by which to attack plants, and plants have evolved defense mechanisms. Both sets of mechanisms use information from the other. The pathogen's enzymes break down the plant's cell walls, and breakdown products signal the plant that it is under attack. In turn, the plant's defenses alert the pathogen that it is under attack. What determines the outcome of a battle between a plant and a pathogen? The key to success for the plant is to respond to the information about the pathogen quickly and massively. Plants use both mechanical and chemical defenses in this effort. 39.1.1 Plants seal off infected parts to limit damage 679Tissues such as the epidermis or cork protect the outer surfaces of plants, and these tissues are generally covered by cutin, suberin, or waxes. This protection is comparable to passive nonspecific defenses of animals. When pathogens pass these barriers, plant defenses are activated. The defense systems of plants and animals differ. Animals generally repair tissues that have been infected. Plants, on the other hand, do not make repairs. Instead, they seal off and sacrifice the damaged tissue so that the rest of the plant does not become infected. This approach works because most plants, unlike most animals, can replace damaged parts by growing new stems, leaves, and roots. One of the plant's first defensive responses is the rapid deposition of additional polysaccharides to the cell walls, reinforcing a barrier to invasion by the pathogen. These polysaccharides block the plasmodesmata, limiting the ability of viral pathogens to move from cell to cell. The polysaccharides also serve as a base upon which lignin may be laid down, enhancing the mechanical barrier and making cells inhospitable to some pathogens due to the toxicity of lignin building blocks. Plants have potent chemical defenses against pathogensWhen infected by certain fungi and bacteria, plants produce a variety of defense molecules, among which are small molecules called phytoalexins and larger proteins called pathogenesis-related proteins. These responses result from the activation of genes, leading to increased production of pathogenesis-related proteins as well as enzymes needed for phytoalexin synthesis. Phytoalexins are mostly phenolics or terpenes, which are toxic to many fungi and bacteria. They are produced by infected cells and their immediate neighbors within hours of the onset of infection. Enzymes from a pathogenic fungus can cause plant cell walls to release hormones called oligosaccharins, which trigger phytoalexin production. Because their antimicrobial activity is nonspecific, phytoalexins can destroy many species of fungi and bacteria in addition to the one that originally triggered their production. Physical injuries, viral infections, and even certain chemical compounds can also induce the production of phytoalexins. There are several types of pathogenesis-related proteins, or PR proteins. Some are enzymes that may break down the cell walls of pathogens. These enzymes destroy some of the invading cells, and in some cases the breakdown products of the pathogen's cell walls serve as chemical signals that trigger further defensive responses. Other PR proteins may serve as alarm signals to plant cells that have not yet been attacked. In general, PR proteins appear not to be rapid-response weapons; rather, they act more slowly, perhaps after other mechanisms have blunted the pathogen's attack. Plants that are resistant to fungal, bacterial, or viral diseases generally owe this resistance to what is known as the hypersensitive response. In this response cells around the site of microbial infection die, preventing the spread of the pathogen by depriving it of nutrients. Some of the cells produce phytoalexins and other chemicals before they die. The dead tissue, called a necrotic lesion, contains and isolates what is left of the microbial invasion. The rest of the plant remains free of the infecting microbe. One of the chemicals produced during the hypersensitive response is a close relative of aspirin. Aspirin-acetylsalicylic acid-is one of the best-selling drugs in the world and has been for many years. People commonly take aspirin to reduce fever and pain. In our bodies aspirin is hydrolyzed to produce the substance that actually causes the effects, salicylic acid. Since ancient times, people in Asia, Europe, and the Americas have used willow (Salix) leaves and bark to relieve pain and fever. The active ingredient in willow is salicylic acid, and it now appears that all plants contain at least some salicylic acid. This compound plays a hormonal role in the plants' own defenses, often leading to a long-lasting effect in some plants, making them resistant to later attacks by pathogens. Let's look at this long-term resistance. Systemic acquired resistance is a general increase in the resistance of the entire plant to a wide range of pathogen species. It is not limited to the pathogen that originally triggered it or to the site of the original infection. The systemic acquired resistance that sometimes follows the hypersensitive response is accompanied by the synthesis of PR proteins. Among the PR proteins are enzymes that directly attack pathogens-for example, enzymes that attack the cell walls of fungi. Treatment of plants with salicylic acid or aspirin leads to the production of PR proteins and to a resistance to pathogens. Salicylic acid treatment provides substantial protection against tobacco mosaic virus (a well-studied plant pathogen) and some other viruses. Salicylic acid also serves as a hormone for disease resistance. In some cases, microbial infection in one part of a plant leads to the export of salicylic acid to other parts of the plant, where it causes the production of PR proteins before the infection can spread. The PR proteins then limit the extent of the infection. Infected plant parts also produce the closely related methyl salicylate (also known as oil of wintergreen). This volatile substance travels to other parts through the air. It may be that methyl salicylate can also trigger the production of PR proteins in neighboring plants that have not yet been infected. 39.1.2 Some plant genes match up with pathogen genes 681Many plants use the hypersensitive response and systemic acquired resistance as nonspecific defenses against various pathogens. But there are other defense mechanisms, some of which are highly specific. An important example is gene-for-gene resistance, in which the ability of a plant to defend itself against a specific strain of a pathogen depends on the plant's having a particular allele of a gene that matches a particular allele of a corresponding gene in the pathogen. Let's see how this matching works. Plants have a large number of R genes (resistance genes), and many pathogens have sets of Avr genes (avirulence genes). Dominant R alleles favor resistance, and dominant Avr alleles make a pathogen less effective. If a particular plant has the dominant allele of an R gene corresponding to an Avr gene represented by the dominant allele in a pathogen strain, the plant will be resistant to that strain. This is true even when none of the other R-Avr pairs features matching dominant alleles. (This effect, one R-Avr pair overruling the others, is an example of epistasis, which was discussed in Chapter 10.) The mechanism of gene-for-gene resistance is not completely understood. There are thousands of specific R genes in the plant kingdom, and their products have different functions. The Avr genes in pathogens are simply genes that cause the pathogen to produce a substance that elicits a defensive response in the plant. Most gene-for-gene interactions trigger the hypersensitive response. Not all biological threats to plants come from microorganisms and viruses that cause diseases. Many animals eat plants. 39.2 Plants and Herbivores: Benefits and Losses 681Herbivores-animals that eat plants-depend on plants for energy and nutrients. Plants have defense mechanisms that protect them against herbivores, as we will see, but first let's consider some examples in which herbivores have a positive effect on the plants they eat. 39.2.1 Grazing increases the productivity of some plants 681In grazing, an animal predator eats part of a plant, such as the leaves, without killing the prey organism, which has the potential to grow back. What are the consequences of grazing? Is it detrimental to the plants, or are they somehow adapted to their place in the food chain of nature? Certain plants and their predators evolved together, each acting as the agent of natural selection on the other. Because of this coevolution, grazing increases photosynthetic production in certain plant species. The removal of some leaves from a plant may increase the rate of photosynthesis of the remaining leaves. This phenomenon probably is the result of several factors. First, nitrogen obtained from the soil by the roots no longer needs to be divided among so many leaves. Second, the export of sugars and other photosynthetic products from the leaves may be enhanced because the demand for those products in the roots is undiminished, while the sources for such products-leaves-have been decreased. The remaining leaves may then compensate by photosynthesizing more rapidly.A third and particularly significant factor increasing photosynthesis, especially in grasses, is an increase in the availability of light to the younger, more active leaves or leaf parts. The removal of older or dead leaves by a grazer decreases the shading of younger leaves. Unlike most other plants, which grow from their shoot and leaf tips, grasses grow from the base of the shoot and leaf, so their growth is not destroyed by grazing. Let's look at an example of increased productivity resulting from grazing. Mule deer and elk graze many plants, including one called scarlet gilia. The grazing removes about 95 percent of the aboveground part of each scarlet gilia, but each plant quickly regrows not one but four replacement stems. The grazed plants produce three times as many fruits by the end of the growing season as do ungrazed plants. Some grazed trees and shrubs continue to grow until much later in the season than do ungrazed but otherwise similar plants. This longer growing season results in part because the removal of apical buds by the grazers stimulates lateral buds to become active, thus producing a more heavily branched plant. In addition, leaves on ungrazed plants may die earlier in the growing season than leaves on grazed plants. A plant may benefit from moderate herbivory by attracting animals that spread its pollen or that eat its fruit and thus distribute its seeds through their feces. However, resisting attack by fungi and herbivorous animals and inhibiting the growth of neighboring plants are also to the advantage of a plant. Plants attract, resist, and inhibit other organisms often by producing special chemicals known as secondary products. (Primary products are substances, such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids, which are produced and used by all living things.) Although all organisms use the same kinds of primary products, plants can differ as radically in their secondary products as they do in external appearance. The more than 10,000 secondary plant products range in molecular weight from about 70 to more than 400,000; most, however, are of low molecular weight. Some are produced by only a single species, while others are characteristic of an entire genus or even family. These compounds help plants compensate for being unable to move. Although a plant cannot flee its herbivorous enemies, it may be able to defend itself chemically. The effects of defensive secondary products on animals are diverse. Some act on the nervous systems of herbivorous insects, mollusks, or mammals. Others mimic the natural hormones of animals, causing some insect larvae to fail to develop into adults. Still others damage the digestive tracts of herbivores. Some secondary products are toxic to fungal pests. We make commercial use of secondary plant products as fungicides, insecticides, rodenticides, and pharmaceuticals. While many secondary products have protective functions, others are essential as attractants for pollinators and seed dispersers. Table 39_1 gives the major classes of secondary plant products and their biological roles. In the next section we will look at a specific example of an insecticidal secondary product, canavanine. 39.2.2 Some secondary products play multiple roles 683Some plants produce canavanine, an amino acid that is not found in proteins but that is closely similar to the amino acid arginine, which is found in almost all proteins. Canavanine has two important roles in plants that produce it in significant quantity. The first role is as a nitrogen-storing compound in seeds. The second role is a defensive one and is based on the similarity of canavanine to arginine. Many insect larvae that consume canavanine-containing plant tissue are poisoned: The canavanine is mistakenly incorporated into the insect's proteins in some of the places where the DNA has coded for arginine-the enzyme that charges the tRNA specific for arginine fails to discriminate accurately between arginine and canavanine. The structure of canavanine is different enough from that of arginine that some of the proteins end up with modified tertiary structure and hence reduced biological activity. The defects in protein structure and function lead to developmental abnormalities that kill the insect. A few insect larvae are able to eat canavanine-containing plant tissue and still develop normally. How can this be? In these larvae, the enzyme that charges the arginine tRNA discriminates correctly between arginine and canavanine. The canavanine they ingest is thus not incorporated into the proteins they form, and the larvae are not harmed. Plant defenses result from a series of signals. Insects feeding on tomato leaves damage the cells, leading to a chain of events including the formation of hormones called systemin and jasmonates and ending with the production of an insecticide. Systemin is a polypeptide-the first polypeptide hormone to be discovered in plants. Jasmonates are formed from the unsaturated fatty acid linolenic acidThe final step in this series is the production of a protease inhibitor. The inhibitor, once in an insect's gut, interferes with the digestion of proteins and thus stunts the insect's growth. Jasmonates also take part in the "call for help" described at the beginning of this chapter. In that case, a substance released by the chewing caterpillars is the first signal, leading to the formation of jasmonates by the plant. The jasmonates, in turn, trigger the formation of the volatile compounds that attract the "helper" insects. In some cases, splicing in a gene may confer insect resistance. Wild and domesticated common beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) differ in their resistance to attack by two species of bean weevils. Some wild bean seeds are highly resistant to these insects, but no cultivated bean seeds show such resistance. Scientists discovered that all weevil-resistant bean seeds contain a specific seed protein, arcelin. This protein has never been found in cultivated bean seeds. Therefore, the scientists hypothesized that arcelin is responsible for the resistance of some seeds to predation by the weevils.To rule out other differences between wild and cultivated beans as being responsible for the resistance, scientists performed two series of experiments testing the relationship between resistance and the possession of arcelin. In one series, they crossed cultivated and wild bean plants. The progeny seeds of such crosses showed an absolute correlation between the presence of arcelin and resistance to weevils. In the other series of experiments, the scientists worked with artificial bean seeds made by removing seed coats of cultivated beans and grinding the remainder of the seeds into flour. They added different concentrations of arcelin to different batches and molded the flour into artificial seeds. They then let weevils attack the artificial seeds. The more arcelin the artificial seeds contained, the more resistant they were to weevils. Scientists seek to introduce genes for arcelin or other resistance-conferring proteins into agriculturally important crops such as beans. In preliminary tests, arcelin in cooked beans was also shown not to be harmful to rats-a first step toward determining whether arcelin is safe in food for humans. As we have seen, many plants produce toxic chemicals that protect them from herbivores and from pathogenic microbes. Why don't these secondary products kill the plants that produce them? 39.2.3 Why don't plants poison themselves? 684Plants that produce toxic secondary products generally use one of the following measures to protect themselves: The toxic material is isolated in a special compartment such as the central vacuole; The toxic substance is produced only after the plant's cells have already been damaged; or Plants use modified enzymes or modified receptors that do not recognize the toxic substances. The first method is the most common. Plants using the first method store their water-soluble poisons in vacuoles. If hydrophobic, the poison is stored in laticifers (tubes containing a white, rubbery latex) or dissolved in waxes on the epidermal surface. The compartmentalized storage keeps the toxic substance away from the mitochondria, chloroplasts, and other parts of the plant's own metabolic machinery.Some plants store the precursors of toxic substances in one compartment, such as the epidermis, and store the enzymes that convert the precursors to the active poison in another compartment, such as the mesophyll. These plants produce the toxic substance only after being damaged. When an herbivore chews part of the plant, cells rupture and the enzymes come in contact with the precursors, producing the toxic product that repels the herbivore. The only part of the plant that is damaged by the toxic material is that which was already damaged by the herbivore. Plants that respond to attack by producing cyanide-a strong inhibitor of cellular respiration in all organisms that respire-are among those that use this protective measure. The third protective measure is used by the canavanine-producing plants described earlier. These plants produce a tRNA-charging enzyme for arginine that does not bind canavanine. However, some herbivores can evade being poisoned by canavanine because their enzymes, like that of the canavanine-producing plants, do not use canavanine by mistake.Not all plants use protective chemicals to defend themselves against herbivores or pathogens. Should we encourage such defenses in the plants that we cultivate? That is, should we be breeding crop plants that make their own pesticides? Agricultural scientists must choose between protection and taste to humans. A plant with sturdy chemical defenses may taste bad, make us sick, or even kill us. A current emphasis in agricultural biotechnology is the development of crop plants that produce their own useful pesticides that are not harmful or offensive to us. One of the most widely applied approaches is the engineering of several crops such as tomato, corn, and cotton to express the toxin genes from Bacillus thuringiensis. 39.2.4 The plant doesn't always win, of course 685Milkweeds such as Asclepias syriaca are latex-producing (laticiferous) plants. When damaged, a milkweed releases copious amounts of toxic latex from its laticifers. Latex has long been suspected to deter insects from eating the plant, because insects that feed on neighboring plants of other species do not attack laticiferous plants. This observed behavior is consistent with, but does not prove, the hypothesis that the latex keeps the insects at bay. Stronger support for the hypothesis was obtained by studying field populations of Labidomera clivicollis, a beetle that is one of the few insects that feed on A. syriaca. The beetles show a remarkable prefeeding behavior: They cut a few veins in the leaves before settling down to dine on the leaves. Cutting the veins, with their adjacent laticifers, causes massive latex leakage and interrupts the latex supply to a downstream portion of the leaf. The beetles then move to the relatively latex-free portion and eat their fill. Does this behavior of the beetles negate the adaptational value of latex protection? Not entirely. There are still great numbers of potential insect pests that are effectively deterred by the latex. And evolution proceeds. Over time, milkweed plants producing higher concentrations of toxins may be selected by virtue of their ability to kill beetles that cut the laticifers. Having discussed how plants defend themselves against other organisms, we will now turn our attention to how plants adapt to environments where water is a problem. 39.3 Water Extremes: Dry Soils and Saturated Soils 685Water for plants and other organisms is often in short supply in the terrestrial environment. Some terrestrial habitats, such as deserts, intensify this challenge, and many plants that inhabit particularly dry areas have one or more structural adaptations that allow them to conserve water. Plants adapted to dry environments are called xerophytes. In contrast, some plants live in environments so wet that the oxygen supply to their roots is severely limited. In this section, we'll consider structural and chemical adaptations to certain environments, but first let's look at a behavioral adaptation. 39.3.1 Some plants evade drought 685Some desert plants have no special structural adaptations for water conservation other than those found in almost all flowering plants. Instead they have an alternative strategy. These desert annuals simply evade the periods of drought. They carry out their entire life cycle-from seed to seed-during a brief period in which rainfall has made the surrounding desert soil sufficiently moist. Plants that remain active during the dry periods must have special adaptations that enable them to survive. The secretion of a heavier layer of cuticle over the leaf epidermis to retard water loss is a common adaptation to dry environments. An even more common adaptation is a dense covering of epidermal hairs. Some species have stomata only in sunken cavities below the leaf surface, which reduces the drying effects of air currents; often these stomatal cavities contain hairs as well. Ice plants and their relatives have fleshy leaves in which water may be stored. Others, such as ocotillo, produce leaves only when water is abundant, shedding them as the soil dries out. Cacti and similar plants have spines rather than typical leaves, and photosynthesis is confined to the fleshy stems. The spines may reflect incident radiation, or they may dissipate heat. Corn and some related grasses have leaves that roll up during dry periods, thus reducing the leaf surface area through which water is lost. Some trees, such as eucalyptuses, that grow in arid regions have leaves that hang vertically at all times, thus evading the midday sun.Xerophytic adaptations of leaves minimize water loss by the plant. However, such adaptations simultaneously minimize the uptake of carbon dioxide and thus limit photosynthesis. In consequence, most xerophytes grow slowly, but they utilize water more efficiently than do other plants; that is, they fix more grams of carbon by photosynthesis per gram of water lost to transpiration than other plants do. Roots may also be adapted to environments low in water. The Atacama Desert in northern Chile often goes several years without measurable rainfall. The landscape there is almost barren of plant life, save for many surprisingly large mesquite trees (genus Prosopis). These trees obtain water by having taproots that grow to great depths, reaching water supplies far underground-as well as by condensation on their leaves. A more common adaptation of desert plants is a root system that grows rapidly during rainy seasons but dies back during dry periods. Cacti have shallow but extensive fibrous root systems that effectively intercept water at the surface of the soil following even light rains. Xerophytes and other plants that receive inadequate water may accumulate the amino acid proline to substantial concentrations in their vacuoles. As a consequence, the osmotic potential and water potential of the cells become more negative; thus these plants tend to extract more water from the soil than do plants that lack this adaptation. As we have seen, there are many ways in which some plants eke out an existence in terrestrial environments with very little water. What happens if there is too much water?When soils become flooded, oxygen from the soil becomes less available. Since most plant roots require oxygen to support respiration and ATP production, most plants cannot tolerate this situation long. Some species, however, are adapted to life in a water-saturated habitat. Their roots grow slowly and hence do not penetrate deeply. With an oxygen level too low to support aerobic respiration, the roots carry on alcoholic fermentation (see Chapter 7), which provides ATP for the activities of the root system but explains why growth is slow. The root systems of some plants adapted to swampy environments have pneumatophores, which are extensions that grow out of the water and up into the air. Pneumatophores have lenticels and contain spongy tissues that allow oxygen to diffuse, aerating the submerged parts of the root system. Cypresses and some mangroves are examples of plants with pneumatophores. Submerged or partly submerged aquatic plants often have large air spaces in the leaf parenchyma and in the petioles. Tissue with such air spaces is called aerenchyma. Aerenchyma stores oxygen produced by photosynthesis and permits its ready diffusion to places where it is needed for cellular respiration. Aerenchyma also imparts buoyancy. Thus far we have considered water supply-either too little or too much-as a limiting factor in plant growth. Other substances also can make an environment inhospitable to plant growth. One of these is salt.39.4 Too Much Salt: Saline Environments 688Worldwide, no toxic substance restricts flowering plant growth more than salt (sodium chloride) does. Saline-salty-habitats support, at best, sparse vegetation. The halophytes, plants adapted to such a habitat, belong to a wide variety of flowering plant groups. Saline environments themselves are diverse, ranging from hot, dry, salty deserts to moist, cool, salty marshes. Along the seashore are salty environments created by ocean spray. The ocean itself is a saline environment, as are river estuaries, where fresh and salt water meet and mingle. The salinization of agricultural land is an increasing world problem. Even where crops are irrigated with fresh water, low in salt, sodium ions in the water accumulate in the soil to ever-greater concentrations. Biologists in Israel and elsewhere have had some success in breeding crops that can be watered with seawater or diluted seawater.Saline environments pose an osmotic problem. Because of a high salt concentration, the environment has an unusually large negative water potential. To obtain water from such an environment, resident plants must have an even more negative water potential than that of plants in nonsaline environments; otherwise, the plants lose water, wilt, and die. A second problem related to the saline environment is the potential toxicity of high concentrations of certain ions, notably sodium. Chloride ions may also be toxic at high concentrations. Most halophytes share one adaptation: They accumulate sodium and, usually, chloride ions, and they transport these ions to the leaves. Nonhalophytes accumulate relatively little sodium, even when placed in a saline environment; of the sodium that is absorbed by their roots, very little is transported to the shoot. In halophytes, the increased salt concentration makes their water potential more negative, so they can take up water from the saline environment. The accumulated sodium ions are stored in the central vacuoles of leaf cells, away from more sensitive parts of the cells. In 1999, scientists reported the first success in causing overexpression of a gene in Arabidopsis that encodes an Na+/H+ antiport protein in the membrane (tonoplast) surrounding the central vacuole. That is, the gene produced a greater than normal number of these antiport proteins, increasing sodium transport and converting this nonhalophyte into a halophyte. Further research along this line may result in a great boost to agriculture in saline environments. Some halophytes have other adaptations to life in saline environments. For example, some have salt glands in their leaves. These glands excrete salt, which collects on the leaf surface until it is removed by rain or wind. This adaptation, which reduces the danger of poisoning by accumulated salt, is found both in some desert plants, such as tamarisk, and in some mangroves growing in seawater in the Tropics.Salt glands can play multiple roles, as in the arid-zone shrub Atriplex halimus. This shrub has glands that secrete salt into small bladders on the leaves where, by increasing the gradient in water potential, the salt helps the leaves obtain water from the roots. At the same time, by making the water potential of the leaves more negative, the salt reduces the transpirational loss of water to the atmosphere. These adaptations are specific to halophytes. Several other adaptations are shared by halophytes and xerophytes. Many halophytes accumulate the amino acid proline in their cell vacuoles. Unlike sodium, proline is relatively nontoxic. As in xerophytes, the accumulated proline makes the water potential more negative. Succulence-the possession of fleshy, water-storing leaves-is an adaptation to dry environments. The same adaptation is common among halophytes, as might be expected, since saline environments also make water uptake difficult for plants. Succulence characterizes many halophytes that occupy salt marshes. There the salt concentration in the soil solution may change throughout the day; while the tide is out, for instance, evaporation increases the salt concentration. Succulence may offer a reserve of water for the plant during the period of maximum salinity; when the salinity drops as the tide comes in, the leaf's store of water is replenished. Many succulents-both xerophytes and halophytes-use crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) and have reversed stomatal cycles that enable them to conserve water by closing their stomata in the daytime. Other general adaptations to a saline environment include high root-to-shoot ratios, sunken stomata, reduced leaf areas, and thick cuticles. Salt is not the only toxic solute in soils. Some heavy metal ions are more toxic than sodium at equivalent concentrations.39.5 Habitats Laden with Heavy Metals 689High concentrations of heavy-metal ions, such as aluminum, mercury, lead, and cadmium, poison most plants, even though plants require some heavy metals at low concentrations. Some geographical sites are naturally rich in heavy metals as a result of normal geological processes. Acid rain leads to the release of toxic aluminum ions in the soil. Other human activities, notably the mining of metallic ores, leave localized areas-known as tailings-with substantial concentrations of heavy metals and low concentrations of nutrients. Such sites are hostile to most plants, and seeds falling on them generally do not produce adult plants. Mine tailings rich in heavy metals, however, generally are not completely barren. They may support healthy plant populations that differ genetically from populations of the same species on the surrounding normal soils. How can these plants survive? Initially, some plants were thought to tolerate heavy metals by excluding them: By not taking up the metal ions, the plant could avoid being poisoned. However, measurements have shown that tolerant plants growing on mine tailings do take up the heavy metals, accumulating them to concentrations that would kill most plants. Thus the tolerant plants must have a mechanism for dealing with the heavy metals they take up. Some tolerant plants may be found to be useful agents for bioremediation, the decontamination process by which the heavy metal content of some contaminated soils is decreased.We know the mechanism of at least one case of tolerance to a heavy metal.  The roots of a buckwheat grown in China secrete oxalic acid soon after they are exposed to high aluminum concentrations that inhibit root growth in other plants.  Oxalic acid combines with aluminum ions, forming a complex that is not inhibitory to growth. From mine to mine, the heavy metals in the soil differ. In Wales and Scotland, bent grass (Agrostis) grows near many mines. Samples of bent grass from several such sites were tested for their ability to grow in various solutions, each containing only one of the heavy metals. In general, the plants tolerated a particular heavy metal-the one most abundant in their habitat-but were sensitive to other heavy metals. That is, they tolerated only one or two heavy metals, rather than heavy metals as a group. Tolerant populations can evolve and colonize an area surprisingly rapidly. The bent grass population around a particular copper mine in Wales is resistant to copper and relatively abundant, even though the copper-rich soil dates from mining done late in the nineteenth century, only a century ago. Temperatures that are too high or too low can stress plants and even kill them. Plants differ in their sensitivity to heat and cold, but all plants have their limits. Both high and low temperatures damage cellular membranes. High temperatures destabilize membranes and denature many proteins, especially some of the enzymes of photosynthesis. Low temperatures cause membranes to lose their fluidity and alter their permeabilities to solutes. Freezing temperatures may cause ice crystals to form, damaging cellular membranes. Many plants that live in hot environments are adapted in the same ways that some xerophytes are adapted to dry environments. These adaptations include epidermal hairs and spines that radiate heat, modified leaf displays that intercept less direct sunlight, and others. Transpiration, the evaporative loss of water, cools plants as well, but it also increases the plant's need for water. Plants respond within minutes to high temperatures by producing several kinds of heat shock proteins. Among these are chaperone proteins that help other proteins maintain their structures and avoid denaturation. Threshold temperatures for production of heat shock proteins vary, but 40C is sufficient to induce them in most plants. We have much to learn about the dozens of heat shock proteins, but we do know that some other types of stress also induce their formation.  Among these are chilling and freezing.Low but nonfreezing temperatures injure many plants, including important crops such as rice, corn, and cotton. Many plant species can be modified to resist the effects of cold spells, a process called cold-hardening, by repeated exposure to cool but not injurious temperatures. The hardening process is a slow one, requiring many days. A key change during the hardening process is an increase in the relative fraction of unsaturated fatty acids in membranes. Unsaturated fatty acids solidify at lower temperatures than do saturated ones. Thus, the membranes retain their fluidity and function normally. Low temperatures induce the formation of certain heat shock proteins, which protect against chilling damage. There are also cases of "cross-protection" by heat shock proteins that are induced by one type of stress and that protect against other stresses. For example, tomatoes shocked by two days of high temperature formed heat shock proteins and became resistant to chilling damage for the next three weeks. Ice crystals that form within cells can kill them by puncturing organelles and plasma membranes. Even outside cells, the growth of ice crystals can draw water from the cells and dehydrate them. Freezing-tolerant plants have a variety of adaptations. A common one is the production of antifreeze proteins that inhibit the growth of ice crystals. Plants have effective mechanisms for coping with environmental challenges of many kinds. Their success is obvious-look around you.