2 Small Molecules: Structure and BehaviorLife is almost everywhere on Earth. In recent years, some startling discoveries have shown that life can exist in places we never dreamed possible. There are organisms living in hot springs at temperatures above the boiling point of water, beneath the frozen Antarctic ice, 2 miles below the Earth's surface, 3 miles below the surface of the sea, in extremely acid environments, in extremely salty conditions, and even inside nuclear reactors. Such findings have rekindled interest in astrobiology, the science of life outside the Earth. The one absolute requirement for life is water. Without water to act as a solvent for biochemicals, to receive wastes, to absorb heat, and to participate directly in chemical reactions, life would not exist as we know it. With strong recent evidence that there was once flowing water on Mars, and that Europa (one of Jupiter's moons) may have a thin crust of ice with liquid water below it, there is great excitement about the possibility of life on nearby extraterrestrial bodies. But what form would this life take? A major discovery of biology is that living things are composed of the same types of chemical elements as the vast nonliving portion of the universe. This mechanistic view-that life is chemically based and obeys universal physicochemical laws-is a relatively recent one in human history. The concept of a "vital force" responsible for life, different from the forces found in physics and chemistry, was common in Western culture until the nineteenth century, and many people still assume such a force exists. However, most scientists adhere to a mechanistic view of life. Before describing how chemical elements are arranged in living creatures, we examine some fundamental chemical concepts. The first part of this chapter will address the constituents of matter: atoms. We examine their variety, their properties, and their capacity to combine with other atoms. Then we consider how matter changes. In addition to changes in state (solid to liquid to gas), substances undergo changes that transform both their composition and their characteristic properties. Then we return to a consideration of the structure and properties of water and its relationship to acids and bases. We close with a consideration of characteristic groups of atoms that contribute specific properties to larger molecules of which they are part, and which will be the subject of Chapter 3. 2.1 Atoms: The Constituents of Matter 17More than a trillion atoms could fit in a single layer over the period at the end of this sentence. Each atom consists of a dense, positively charged nucleus, around which one or more negatively charged electrons move. The nucleus contains one or more protons and may contain one or more neutrons. Atoms and their component particles have mass. Mass is a property of all matter. Measuring mass measures the quantity of matter present. The greater the mass, the greater the quantity of matter. The mass of a proton serves as a standard unit of measure: the atomic mass unit (amu), or dalton (named after the English chemist John Dalton). A single proton or neutron has a mass of 1 dalton, which is 1.7 ? 10-24 grams (0.0000000000000000000000017 g). The mass of an electron is 9 ? 10-28 g (0.0005 dalton). Because the mass of an electron is so much less than the mass of a proton or a neutron, the contribution of electrons to the mass of an atom can usually be ignored. Even the smallest atoms, such as helium, have measurable mass. The positive electric charge of a proton is defined as a unit of charge. An electron has a negative charge equal and opposite to that of a proton. Thus the charge of a proton is +1 unit, and that of an electron is -1 unit. Unlike charges (+/-)  attract each other; like charges (+/+ or -/-) repel each other. The neutron, as its name suggests, is electrically neutral, so its charge is 0 unit. When the number of protons in an atom equals the number of electrons, the atom is electrically neutral. An atom with more or fewer electrons than protons has an electric charge and is called an ion; we will discuss ions in detail later in the chapter.2.1.1 An element is made up of only one kind of atom 18An element is a pure substance that contains only one type of atom. The element hydrogen consists only of hydrogen atoms; the element iron consists only of iron atoms. The atoms of each element have certain characteristics or properties that distinguish them from the atoms of other elements. The more than 100 elements found in the universe are arranged in the periodic table.  These elements are not found in equal amounts. The Earth's crust is half oxygen, with about 3 percent each of sodium, magnesium, potassium, calcium, and iron, and much smaller amounts of the other elements. About 98 percent of the mass of every living organism (bacterium, turnip, or human) is composed of just six elements: carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur. Other elements are present in small amounts. The chemistry of the six major elements will be our primary concern here, but the others are not unimportant. Sodium and potassium, for example, are essential for nerves to function; calcium can act as biological signal; iodine is a component of a vital hormone; plants need molybdenum in order to incorporate nitrogen into biologically useful substances.2.1.2 The number of protons identifies the element 19An element is distinguished from other elements by the number of protons in each of its atoms. This number, which does not change, is called the atomic number. An atom of hydrogen contains 1 proton, a helium atom has 2 protons, carbon has 6 protons, and plutonium has 94 protons. The atomic numbers of these elements are thus 1, 2, 6, and 94, respectively. Every element except hydrogen has one or more neutrons in its nucleus. The mass number of an atom equals the total number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus. Because the mass of an electron is infinitesimal compared with that of a neutron or proton, electrons are ignored in calculating the mass number. The nucleus of a helium atom contains 2 protons and 2 neutrons; oxygen has 8 protons and 8 neutrons. Helium, therefore, has a mass number of 4 and oxygen a mass number of 16. The mass number may be thought of as the weight of the atom in daltons. Each element has its own one- or two-letter chemical symbol. For example, H stands for hydrogen, He for helium, and O for oxygen. Some symbols come from other languages: Fe (from the Latin ferrum) stands for iron, Na (Latin natrium) for sodium, and W (German Wolfram) for tungsten. The periodic table gives the symbols for the 92 natural elements, as well as showing 26 elements (elements 93-118) that have been synthesized in laboratories but have not been found in nature. In text, the atomic number and mass number of an element are written to the left of the element's symbol. Thus, hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen are written as 11H, 126C, and 168O, respectively.2.1.3 Isotopes differ in number of neutrons 19We have been speaking of elements as if each had only one atomic form, but this is not true. Isotopes of the same element all have the same number of protons, but differ in the number of neutrons in the atomic nucleus. In nature, many elements exist as several isotopes.For example, the natural isotopes of carbon are 12C, 13C, and 14C. Unlike the hydrogen isotopes, which have special names, the isotopes of most elements do not have distinct names. Rather, they are written in the form shown above and are referred to as carbon-12, carbon-13, and carbon-14, respectively. Most carbon atoms are 12C, about 1.1 percent are 13C, and a tiny fraction are 14C. An element's atomic mass, or atomic weight,* is the average of the mass numbers of a representative sample of atoms of the element, with all isotopes in their normally occurring  proportions. The atomic weight of carbon is thus calculated to be 12.011. *The concepts of "weight" and "mass" are not identical. Weight is the measure of the Earth's gravitational attraction for mass; on another planet, the same quantity of mass would have a different weight. On Earth, however, the term "weight" is often used as a measure of mass, and in biology one encounters the terms "weight" and "atomic weight" more frequently than "mass" and "atomic mass"; therefore, we will use "weight" for the remainder of this book. Some isotopes, called radioisotopes, are unstable and spontaneously give off energy as ( (alpha), ( (beta), or ( (gamma) radiation from the atomic nucleus. Such radioactive decay transforms the original atom into another atom, usually of another element. For example, americium-241 loses an alpha particle (actually a positively charged helium atom) to form neptunium-237, and carbon-14 loses a beta particle (actually an electron) to form nitrogen-14. Biologists and physicians can incorporate radioisotopes into molecules and use the emitted radiation as a tag to locate those molecules or to identify changes that the molecules undergo inside the body 3). Three radioisotopes commonly used in this way are 3H (tritium),14C (carbon-14), and 32P (phosphorus-32). In addition to these applications, radioisotopes can be used to date fossils (see Chapter 19). Although radioisotopes are useful for experiments and in medicine, even low doses of their radiation have the potential to damage molecules and cells. Gamma radiation from cobalt-60 (60Co) is used medically to damage or kill rapidly dividing cancer cells.2.1.4 Electron behavior determines chemical bonding 19When considering atoms, biologists are concerned primarily with electrons because the behavior of electrons explains how chemical changes occur in living cells. These changes, called chemical reactions or just reactions, are changes in the atomic composition of substances. The characteristic number of electrons in each atom of an element determines how its atoms react with other atoms. All chemical reactions involve changes in the relationships of electrons with one another. The location of a given electron in an atom at any given time is impossible to determine. We can only describe a volume of space within the atom where the electron is likely to be. The region of space where the electron is found at least 90 percent of the time is the electron's orbital. In an atom, a given orbital can be occupied by at most two electrons. Thus any atom larger than helium (atomic number 2) must have electrons in two or more orbitals. The different orbitals have characteristic forms and orientations in space. The orbitals in turn constitute a series of electron shells, or energy levels, around the nucleus. The first, or innermost electron shell, consists of only one orbital, called an s orbital. The s orbital fills with electrons first, and its electrons have the lowest energy. Hydrogen (1H) has one electron in its first shell; helium (2He) has two. All other elements have two first-shell electrons, as well as electrons in other shells. The second shell is made up of four orbitals (an s orbital and three p orbitals) and hence can hold up to eight electrons. Subsequent shells have different numbers of orbitals, but the outermost orbitals can usually hold only eight electrons. In any atom, the outermost electron shell determines how the atom combines with other atoms; that is, how an atom behaves chemically. When an outermost shell consisting of four orbitals contains eight electrons, there are no unpaired electrons. Such an atom is stable and will not react with other atoms. Examples of chemically inert elements are helium, neon, and argon. The atoms of other elements seek to attain the stable condition of having no unpaired electrons in their outer shells. They attain this stability by sharing electrons with other atoms or by gaining or losing one or more electrons from their outermost orbitals. When they share electrons, atoms are bonded together. Such bonds create stable associations of atoms called molecules. A molecule can be defined as two or more atoms linked by chemical bonds. The tendency of atoms in stable molecules to have eight electrons in their outermost orbitals is known as the octet rule. Many atoms in biologically important molecules-for example, carbon (C) and nitrogen (N)-follow the octet rule. However, some biologically important atoms, such as hydrogen and phosphorus, are exceptions to the rule. Hydrogen (H) is an obvious exception, attaining stability when only two electrons occupy its outermost orbital. 2.2 Chemical Bonds: Linking Atoms Together 20A chemical bond is an attractive force that links two atoms to form a molecule. There are several kinds of chemical bonds. In this section, we first discuss covalent bonds, the strong bonds that result from sharing of electrons. Then we examine other kinds of interactions, including hydrogen bonds, that are weaker than covalent bonds but enormously important to biology. Finally, we consider ionic bonding, which results when ions form as a consequence of the complete loss or gain of electrons by atoms.2.2.1 Covalent bonds consist of shared pairs of electrons 20When two atoms attain stable electron numbers in their outer shells by sharing one or more pairs of electrons, a covalent bond forms. Consider two hydrogen atoms in close proximity, each with a single unpaired electron in the outer shell. Each positively charged nucleus exerts some attraction on the other atom's unpaired electron, but this attraction is balanced by each electron's attraction to its own nucleus. So the two unpaired electrons become shared by both atoms, filling the outer shells of both of them. A carbon atom has a total of six electrons; two electrons fill its inner shell and four are in its outer shell. Because the outer shell can hold up to eight electrons, this atom can share electrons with up to four other atoms. Thus it can form four covalent bonds. When an atom of carbon reacts with four hydrogen atoms, a substance called methane (CH4) forms. Thanks to electron sharing, the outer shell of methane's carbon atom is filled with eight electrons, and the outer shell of each hydrogen atom is also filled. Thus four covalent bonds-each consisting of a shared pair of electrons-hold methane together. Table 2 2 shows the covalent bonding capacities of some biologically significant elements.Covalent bonds are very strong. The thermal energy that biological molecules ordinarily have at body temperature is less that 1 percent of that needed to break covalent bonds. So biological molecules, most of which are put together with covalent bonds, are quite stable. A second property of covalent bonds is that, for a given pair of atoms, they are the same in length, angle, and direction, regardless of the larger molecule of which the particular bond is a part. The four filled orbitals around the carbon nucleus of methane, for example, distribute themselves in space so that the bonded hydrogens are directed to the corners of a regular tetrahedron with carbon in the center. This three-dimensional structure of carbon and hydrogen is the same in complicated proteins as it is in the simple methane molecule. It makes the prediction of biological structure possible. Although the orientation of orbitals and the shapes of molecules differ depending on the kinds of atoms involved and how they are linked together, it is essential to remember that all molecules occupy space and have three-dimensional shapes. The shapes of molecules contribute to their biological functions, as we will see in Chapter 3.A covalent bond is represented by a line between the chemical symbols for the atoms. A bond in which a single pair of electrons is shared is called a single bond (for example, H-H, C-H). When four electrons (two pairs) are shared, the link is called a double bond (C;dbC). In the gas ethylene (H2C;dbCH2), two carbon atoms share two pairs of electrons. Triple bonds (six shared electrons) are rare, but there is one in nitrogen gas (N;tbN), the chief component of the air we breathe. In the covalent bonds in these five examples, the electrons are shared more or less equally between the nuclei; consequently, all regions of the bonds are identical. If two atoms of the same element are covalently bonded, there is an equal sharing of the pair(s) of electrons in the outer shell. However, when the two atoms are of different elements, the sharing is not necessarily equal. One nucleus may exert a greater attractive force on the electron pair than the other nucleus, and so the pair tends to be closer to that atom. The attractive force that an atom exerts on electrons is its electronegativity. It depends on how many positive charges a nucleus has (nuclei with more protons are more positive and thus more attractive to electrons) and how far away the electrons are from the nucleus (closer means more electronegativity). The closer two atoms are in electronegativity, the more equal their sharing of electrons will be.Table 2 3 shows the electronegativities of some elements important in biological systems. Looking at the table, it is obvious that two oxygen atoms, both with electronegativity of 3.5, will share electrons equally in a covalent bond. So will two hydrogen atoms (both with 2.1). But when hydrogen bonds with oxygen to form water, the electrons involved are unequally shared: they tend to be nearer to the oxygen nucleus because it is the more electronegative of the two. The result is called a polar covalent bond. Because of this unequal sharing of electrons, the oxygen end of the hydrogen-oxygen bond has a slightly negative charge (symbolized (- and spoken as "delta negative," meaning a partial unit of charge), and the hydrogen end is slightly positive ((+). The bond is polar because these opposite charges are separated at the two ends of the bond. The partial charges that result from polar covalent bonds produce polar molecules or polar regions of large molecules. Polar bonds greatly influence the interactions between molecules that contain them.2.2.2 Hydrogen bonds may form between molecules 23In liquid water, the negatively charged oxygen ((-) atom of one water molecule is attracted to the positively charged hydrogen ((+) atoms of another water molecule. (Remember, negative charges attract positive charges.) The bond resulting from this attraction is called a hydrogen bond. Hydrogen bonds are not restricted to water molecules. They may form between an electronegative atom and a hydrogen covalently bonded to a different electronegative atom. Hydrogen bonds can form between small molecules or between different parts of large molecules. Covalent bonds and polar covalent bonds, on the other hand, are always found within molecules. A hydrogen bond is a weak bond; it has about one-twentieth (5%) of the strength of a covalent bond between a hydrogen atom and an oxygen atom. However, where many hydrogen bonds form, they have considerable strength and greatly influence the structure and properties of substances. Later in this chapter we'll see how hydrogen bonding in water contributes to many of the properties of water that are significant for living systems. Hydrogen bonds also play important roles in determining and maintaining the three-dimensional shapes of giant molecules such as DNA and proteins (see Chapter 3).2.2.3 Ions form bonds by electrical attraction 24When one interacting atom is much more electronegative than the other, a complete transfer of one or more electrons may take place. Consider sodium (electronegativity 0.9) and chlorine (3.1). A sodium atom has only one electron in its outermost shell; this condition is unstable. A chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell-another unstable condition. Since the electronegativities of these elements are so different, any electrons involved in bonding will tend to be much nearer to the chlorine nucleus-so near, in fact, that there is a complete transfer of the electron from one element to the other. This reaction between sodium and chlorine makes both atoms more stable. The result is two ions. Ions are electrically charged particles that form when atoms gain or lose one or more electrons. The sodium ion (Na+) has a +1 unit charge because it has one less electron than it has protons. The outermost electron shell of the sodium ion is full, with eight electrons, so the ion is stable. Positively charged ions are called cations. The chloride ion (Cl-) has a -1 unit charge because it has one more electron than it has protons. This additional electron gives Cl- an outer shell with a stable load of eight electrons. Negatively charged ions are called anions. Some elements form ions with multiple charges by losing or gaining more than one electron. Examples are Ca2+ (calcium ion, created from a calcium atom that has lost two electrons) and Mg2+ (magnesium ion). Two biologically important elements each yield more than one stable ion: Iron yields Fe2+ (ferrous ion) and Fe3+ (ferric ion), and copper yields Cu+ (cuprous ion) and Cu2+ (cupric ion). Groups of covalently bonded atoms that carry an electric charge are called complex ions; examples include NH4+ (ammonium ion), SO42- (sulfate ion), and PO43- (phosphate ion).The charge from an ion radiates from it in all directions. Once they form, ions are usually stable, and no more electrons are lost or gained. Ions can form stable bonds, resulting in stable solid compounds such as sodium chloride (NaCl) and potassium phosphate (K3PO4). Ionic bonds are bonds formed by electrical attractions between ions bearing opposite charges. In sodium chloride-familiar to us as table salt-cations and anions are held together by ionic bonds. In solids, the ionic bonds are strong because the ions are close together. However, when ions are dispersed in water, the distance between them can be large; the strength of their attraction is thus greatly reduced. Under the conditions that exist in the cell, an ionic attraction is less than one-tenth as strong as a covalent bond that shares electrons equally. Not surprisingly, ions with one or more units of charge can interact with polar molecules as well as with other ions. Such interaction results when table salt, or any other ionic solid, dissolves in water: "shells" of water molecules surround the individual ions, separating them. The hydrogen bond that we described earlier is a type of ionic bond, because it is formed by electrical attractions. However, it is weaker than most ionic bonds because the hydrogen bond is formed by partial charges ((+ and (-) rather than by whole-unit charges (+1 unit, -1 unit).2.2.4 Polar and nonpolar substances interact best among  themselves 24"Like attracts like" is an old saying, and nowhere is it more true than in polar and nonpolar molecules, which tend to interact with their own kind. Just as water molecules interact with one another through their polarity-induced hydrogen bonds, any molecule that is itself polar will interact with other polar molecules by weak ((+ to (-) attractions in hydrogen bonds. If a polar molecule interacts with water in this way, it is called hydrophilic ("water-loving"). What about nonpolar molecules? For example, carbon (electronegativity 2.5) forms nonpolar bonds with hydrogen (electronegativity 2.1). The resulting hydrocarbon molecule-ethane-is nonpolar, and in water, it will tend to aggregate with other nonpolar molecules rather than with polar water. Such molecules are called hydrophobic ("water-hating"), and the interactions between them are hydrophobic interactions. It is important to realize that hydrophobic substances do not really "hate" water; they can form weak interactions with it (recall that the electronegativities of carbon and hydrogen are not exactly the same). But these interactions are far weaker than the hydrogen bonds between the water molecules, and so the nonpolar substances keep to themselves. These weak interactions between nonpolar substances are enhanced by van der Waals forces, which occur when two atoms are in close proximity. These forces result from random variations in the electron distribution in one molecule, which create an opposite charge distribution in the adjacent molecule. The result is a brief, weak attraction. Although each such interaction is brief and weak at any one site, the summation of many such interactions over the entire span of a large nonpolar molecule can produce substantial attraction. van der Waals forces are important in maintaining the structures of many biologically important substances, as we will see in Chapter 3. 2.3 Chemical Reactions: Atoms Change Partners 25A chemical reaction occurs when atoms combine or change bonding partners. Consider the combustion reaction that takes place in the flame of a propane stove. When propane (C3H8) reacts with oxygen gas (O2), the carbon atoms become bonded to oxygen atoms instead of to hydrogen atoms, and the hydrogen atoms become bonded to oxygen instead of carbon. As the covalently bonded atoms change partners, the composition of the matter changes, and propane and oxygen gas become carbon dioxide and water. This chemical reaction can be represented by the balanced equation: C3H8 + 5 O2 ??3 CO2 + 4 H2O. In this equation, the propane and oxygen are the reactants, and the carbon dioxide and water are the products. In this case, the reaction is complete: All the propane and oxygen are used up in forming the two products. The arrow symbolizes the chemical reaction. The numbers preceding the molecular formulas balance the equation and indicate how many molecules are used or are produced. In this and all other chemical reactions, matter is neither created or destroyed. The total number of carbons on the left equals the total number on the right. However, there is another product of this reaction: energy. The heat of the stove's flame and its blue light reveal that the reaction of propane and oxygen releases a great deal of energy. Energy is defined as the capacity to do work, but on a more intuitive level, it can be thought of as the capacity for change. Chemical reactions do not create or destroy energy, but changes in energy usually accompany chemical reactions.In the reaction between propane and oxygen, the energy that was released as heat and light was already present in the reactants in another form, called potential energy. In some chemical reactions, energy must be supplied from the environment (for example, some substances will react only after being heated), and some of this supplied energy becomes stored as potential chemical energy in the bonds formed in the products. We can measure the energy associated with chemical reactions using a unit called a calorie (cal). A calorie* is the amount of heat energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of pure water from 14.5¡C to 15.5¡C. Another unit of energy that is increasingly used is the joule (J). When you compare data on energy, always compare joules to joules and calories to calories. The two units can be interconverted: 1 J = 0.239 cal, and 1 cal = 4.184 J. Thus, for example, 486 cal = 2,033 J, or 2.033 kJ. Although defined in terms of heat, the calorie and the joule are measures of any form of energy-mechanical, electric, or chemical. *The nutritionist's or dieter's Calorie, with a capital C, is what biologists call a kilocalorie (kcal) and is equal to 1,000 heat-energy calories. Within living cells, chemical reactions called oxidation-reduction reactions take place. These biological reactions have much in common with the combustion of propane. The fuel is different (the sugar glucose, rather than propane), and the reactions proceed by many intermediate steps that permit the energy released from the glucose to be harvested and put to use by the cell. But the products are the same: carbon dioxide and water. We will present and discuss energy changes, oxidation-reduction reactions, and several other types of chemical reactions that are prevalent in living systems in the chapters that follow. 2.4 Water: Structure and Properties 26Water, like all other matter, can exist in three states: solid (ice), liquid, and gas (vapor). Liquid water is the medium in which life originated on Earth more than 3.8 billion years ago, and it is in water that life evolved for its first billion years. Today water covers three-fourths of Earth's surface, and the bodies of all active organisms contain between 45 and 95 percent water. No organism can remain biologically active without water. Within cells, water participates directly in many chemical reactions, and it is the medium (or solvent) in which most biological reactions take place. In this section we will consider the structure and interactions of water molecules, exploring how these generate properties essential to life.2.4.1 Water has a unique structure and special properties 26Each water molecule is composed of one oxygen atom bonded to two hydrogen atoms (H2O). In the molecule, the four pairs of electrons in the outer shell of oxygen repel each other, producing a tetrahedral shape. The shape of the water molecule, its polar nature, and its capacity to form hydrogen bonds give water its unusual properties. For example, ice floats, and compared with other liquids, water is an excellent solvent, making it an ideal medium for biochemical reactions. Water is both cohesive (sticking to itself) and adhesive (sticking to other things). And the energy changes that accompany its transitions from solid to liquid to gas are significant in living systems. ice floats. In its solid state (ice), water is held by its hydrogen bonds in a rigid, crystalline structure in which each water molecule is hydrogen-bonded to four others 14a). Although these molecules are held firmly in place, they are not as tightly packed as they are in liquid water. In other words, solid water is less dense than liquid water, which is why ice floats in water.If ice sank in water, as almost all other solids do in their corresponding liquids, ponds and lakes would freeze from the bottom up, becoming solid blocks of ice in winter and killing most of the organisms living in them. Once the whole pond had frozen, its temperature could drop well below the freezing point of water. However, because ice floats, it forms a protective insulating layer on the top of the pond, reducing heat flow to the cold air above. Thus fish, plants, and other organisms in the pond are not subjected to temperatures lower than 0¡C, the freezing point of pure water. Compared with other nonmetallic substances of the same size, molecular ice requires a great deal of heat energy to melt. Melting 1 mole (a standard quantity-6.02 ? 1023; see p. xx) of water molecules requires the addition of 5.9 kJ of energy. This value is high because more than a mole of hydrogen bonds must be broken for 1 mole of water to change from solid to liquid. In the opposite process, freezing, a great deal of energy must be lost for water to transform from liquid to solid. These properties help make water a moderator of temperature changes.Another property of water that moderates temperature is the high heat capacity of liquid water. The specific heat of a substance is the amount of heat energy required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of that substance by 1¡C. Raising the temperature of liquid water takes a relatively large amount of heat because much of the heat energy is used to break the hydrogen bonds that hold the liquid together. Compared with other small molecules that are liquids, water has a high specific heat. This phenomenon contributes to the surprising constancy of the temperature of the oceans and other large bodies of water through the seasons of the year. The temperature changes of coastal land masses are also moderated by large bodies of water. Indeed, water helps minimize variations in atmospheric temperature throughout the planet. Water also has a high heat of vaporization, which means that a lot of heat is required to change water from its liquid state to its gaseous state (the process of evaporation). This heat is absorbed from the environment in contact with the water. Once again, much of the heat energy is used to break hydrogen bonds. Evaporation thus has a cooling effect on the environment-whether a leaf, a forest, or an entire land mass. This effect explains why sweating cools the human body: As the sweat evaporates off the skin, it uses some of the adjacent body heat in the process.cohesion and surface tension.In liquid water, the molecules are free to move about. The hydrogen bonds between the water molecules continually form and break. In other words, liquid water has a dynamic structure. On average, every water molecule forms 3.4 hydrogen bonds with other water molecules. This number represents fewer bonds than exist in ice, but it is still a high number. These hydrogen bonds explain the cohesive strength of liquid water. The cohesive strength of water is what permits narrow columns of water to stretch from the roots to the leaves of trees more than 100 meters high. When water evaporates from leaves, the entire column moves upward in response to the pull of the molecules at the top. Water also has a high surface tension, which means that the surface of liquid water exposed to the air is difficult to puncture. The water molecules in this surface layer are hydrogen-bonded to other water molecules below. The surface tension of water permits a container to be filled slightly above its rim without overflowing, and it permits small animals to walk on the surface of water.2.4.2 Most biological substances are dissolved in water 28A solution is produced when a substance is dissolved in water (an aqueous solution) or another liquid. As we will see in the next chapter, many of the important molecules in biological systems are polar, and therefore are soluble in water. Much of biochemistry takes place in an aqueous solution. One branch of the study of solutions is qualitative analysis, which deals with substances dissolved in a solvent (in this case, water) and the chemical reactions that occur there. Qualitative analysis is the subject of much of the next few chapters. Solutions can also be studied by quantitative analysis, in which concentrations-the amount of substance in a given amount of solution-are measured. What follows is a brief introduction to some of the quantitative chemical terms you will see in this text. A molecular formula uses chemical symbols to identify the different atoms in a compound and subscript numbers to show how many of each type of atoms are present. Thus, the formula for sucrose-table sugar-is C12H22O11. Each compound has a molecular weight (molecular mass) that is the sum of the atomic weights of all atoms in the molecule. Looking at the periodic table, you can calculate the molecular weight of table sugar to be approximately 342. Molecular weights are usually related to the molecule's size. A mole is the amount of an ion or compund in grams whose weight is numerically equal to its molecular weight. So one mole of sugar weighs 342 grams. One aim of quantitative analysis is to study the behaviors of precise numbers of molecules in solution. But molecules are extremely small, and it is not possible to count them directly. Instead, chemists use a constant that relates the weight of any substance to the number of molecules of that substance. This constant is called Avogadro's number, which is 6.02 ? 1023 molecules per mole. It allows chemists to work with moles of substances (which can be weighed out in the laboratory) instead of actual molecules. The mole concept is analogous to the concept of a dozen: we buy a dozen eggs, knowing that the word "dozen" stands for 12. In the same way, chemists can dissolve a mole of sugar in water to make 1 liter, knowing that the mole contains 6.02 ? 1023 individual sugar molecules. This solution, 1 mole of a substance dissolved in water to make 1 liter, is called a 1 molar (1 M) solution. As we will see in succeeding chapters, the many molecules that dissolve in water in living tissues are not present at anything close to a 1 molar concentration. Most are in the micromolar (millionths of a mole; abbreviated ?M) to millimolar (thousandth of a mole; mM) range. Some, such as hormones, are far less concentrated than this. While these abbreviations seem to indicate very low concentrations, remember that a 1 (M solution has 6.02 ? 1017 molecules of the solute per liter. 2.5 Acids, Bases, and the pH Scale 28Some substances dissolve in water and release hydrogen ions (H+), which are actually single, positively charged protons). These tiny bits of charged matter can attach to other molecules, and in doing so, change their properties. In this section, we examine the properties of substances that release H+ (called acids) and attach to  H+ (called bases). We will distinguish strong and weak acids and bases, and provide a quantitative means for stating the concentration of H+ in solutions: the pH scale. We'll close by looking at how buffers limit the changes in pH.2.5.1 Acids donate H+, bases accept H+ 28If hydrochloric acid (HCl) is added to water, it dissolves and ionizes, releasing H+ and Cl- ions:HCl ? H+ + Cl-. Because its H+ concentration has increased, such a solution is acidic. Just like the burning reaction of propane and oxygen, the dissolution of HCl to form its ions is a complete reaction. HCl is therefore called a strong acid. An acid releases H+ ions in solution. HCl is an acid, as is H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). One molecule of sulfuric acid may ionize to yield two H+ ions and one SO42- ion. Biological compounds that contain -COOH (the carboxyl group) are also acids (such as acetic acid and pyruvic acid), because -COOH ? -COO- + H+. Not all acids dissolve fully in water to form their ions. For example, if acetic acid is added to water, at the end of the reaction, there are not just the two ions, but some of the original acid as well. Because the reaction is not complete, acetic acid is a weak acid. If some NaOH (sodium hydroxide) is added to water, the NaOH dissolves and ionizes, releasing OH- and Na+ ions: NaOH ? Na+ + OH-. Because the concentration of OH- increases, such as solution is basic, and because this reaction is complete, NaOH is a strong base. Bases accept H+ ions. Like acids, there are strong and weak bases. Weak bases include the bicarbonate ion (HCO3-), which can accept a H+ ion and become carbonic acid (H2CO3), and ammonia (NH3), which can accept a H+ ion and become an ammonium ion (NH4+). Amino groups in biological molecules can also accept protons, acting as bases: -NH2 + H+ ? -NH3+. When acetic acid is dissolved in water, there are actually two reactions happening in this solution. First, acetic acid is forming its ions: CH3OOH ? CH3COO- + H+. Then, once they are formed, the ions are re-forming acetic acid: CH3COO- + H+ ? CH3COOH. This pair of reactions is reversible. The formula for a reversible reaction can be written with two arrows: CH3COOH ßà ?CH3COO- + H+. A reversible reaction can proceed in either direction-left to right or right to left-depending on the relative starting concentrations of the reactants and products. In principle, all chemical reactions are reversible. In terms of acids and bases, there are two types of reactions, depending on the extent of reversibility: Ionization of strong acids and bases is virtually irreversible. Ionization of weak acids and bases is somewhat reversible. Many of the acid/base groups on large molecules in biological systems are weak.2.5.2 Water is a weak acid 29The water molecule has a slight but significant tendency to ionize into a hydroxide ion (OH-) and a hydrogen ion (H+). Actually, two water molecules participate in this ionization. One of the two molecules "captures" a hydrogen ion from the other, forming a hydroxide ion and a hydronium ion. The hydronium ion is in effect a hydrogen ion bound to a water molecule. For simplicity, biochemists tend to use a modified representation of the ionization of water: H2O ? H+ + OH-. The ionization of water is very important for all living creatures. This fact may seem surprising, since only about one water molecule in 500 million is ionized at any given time, yielding an average H+ concentration of 10-7 M. But we are less surprised if we focus on the abundance of water in living systems and the reactive nature of the H+ ions produced by ionization.2.5.3 pH is the measure of hydrogen ion concentration 29The terms "acidic" and "basic" refer only to solutions. How acidic or basic a solution is depends on the relative concentrations of H+ and OH- ions in it. "Acid" and "base" refer to compounds and ions. A compound or ion that is an acid can donate H+ ions; one that is a base can accept H+ ions. How do we specify how acidic or basic a solution is? First, let's look at the H+ ion concentrations of a few contrasting solutions. In 1 M of pure water, the H+ concentration is 10-7 M. In 1 M hydrochloric acid, the H+ concentration is 1 M; and in 1 M sodium hydroxide, the H+ concentration is 10-14 M. Because its values range so widely, the H+ concentration itself is an inconvenient quantity to measure. It is easier to work with the logarithm of the concentration, because logarithms compress this range. We indicate how acidic or basic a solution is by its pH (which stands for "potential of Hydrogen"). The pH value is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter (molar concentration). In chemical notation, molar concentration is often indicated by putting square brackets around the symbol for a substance; thus [H+] stands for the molar concentration of H+. The equation for pH is pH = -log10[H+]. Since the H+ concentration of pure water is 10-7 M, its pH is -log(10-7) = -(-7), or 7. A smaller negative logarithm means a larger number. In practical terms, a lower pH means a higher H+ concentration, or greater acidity. In 1 M HCl, the H+ concentration is 1 M, so the pH is the negative logarithm of 1 (-log 100), or 0. The pH of 1 M NaOH is the negative logarithm of 10-14, or 14. A solution with a pH of less than 7 is acidic-it contains more H+ ions than OH- ions. A solution with a pH of 7 is neutral, and a solution with a pH value greater than 7 is basic.
2.5.4 Buffers minimize pH change 30An organism must control the chemistry of its cells-in particular, the pH of the separate compartments within the cells. Animals must also control the pH of their blood. The normal pH of human blood is 7.4, and deviations of even a few tenths of a pH unit can be fatal. The control of pH is made possible in part by buffers, which are chemical systems that maintain a relatively constant pH even when substantial amounts of acid or base are added. A buffer is a mixture of a weak acid and its corresponding base-for example, carbonic acid (H2CO3) and bicarbonate ions (HCO3-). If acid is added to this buffer, not all the H+ ions from that acid stay in solution. Instead, many of them combine with the bicarbonate ions to produce more carbonic acid. This reaction uses up some of the H+ ions in the solution and decreases the acidifying effect of the added acid: HCO3- + H+ ßà H2CO3. If a base is added, the reaction reverses. Some of the carbonic acid ionizes to produce bicarbonate ions and more H+, which counteracts some of the added base. In this way, the buffer minimizes the effects of an added acid or base on pH. A given amount of acid or base causes a smaller change in pH in a buffered solution than in an unbuffered one. Buffers also illustrate an important chemical principle in reversible reactions called the law of mass action. Addition of a component on one side of a reversible system drives the reaction in the direction that uses up that compound. In this case, addition of an acid drives the reaction in one direction; addition of a base drives it in the other. 2.6 The Properties of Molecules 30Molecules vary in size. Some are small, such as H2 and CH4. Others are larger, such as a molecule of table sugar (sucrose), which has 45 atoms. Still other molecules, such as proteins, are gigantic, sometimes containing tens of thousands of atoms bonded together in specific ways. Whether large, medium, or small, most of the molecules in living systems contain carbon atoms and are thus referred to as organic molecules. Most organic molecules include hydrogen and oxygen atoms as well as carbon, and many also include nitrogen and phosphorus.All molecules have a specific three-dimensional shape. For example, the orientation of the bonding orbitals around the carbon atom gives the methane molecule (CH4) the shape of a regular tetrahedron. In carbon dioxide (CO2), the three atoms are in line with one another. Larger molecules have specific complex shapes that result from the numbers and kinds of atoms present and the ways in which they are linked together. Some large molecules have compact, ball-like shapes. Others are long, thin, ropelike structures. Their shapes relate to the roles these molecules play in living cells. In addition to size and shape, molecules have certain properties that characterize them and determine their biological roles. Chemists use the characteristics of composition, structure (three-dimensional shape), reactivity, and solubility to distinguish a sample of one pure molecule from another. The sizes, shapes, solubilities, and reactivities of molecules are significant to understanding the structures and operations of cells and organisms. Certain groups of atoms found together in a variety of molecules simplify our understanding of the reactions that molecules undergo.2.6.1 Functional groups give specific properties to molecules 31Functional groups are groups of atoms that make up part of a larger molecule and have particular chemical properties (shape, polarity, reactivity, solubility). The same functional group may be part of very different molecules. You will encounter several functional groups in your study of biology. An important kind of biological molecule containing functional groups is the amino acids, which have both a carboxyl group and an amino group attached to the same carbon atom, the ( (alpha) carbon. Also attached to the ( carbon atom are a hydrogen atom and a side chain, designated by the letter R. Different side chains have different chemical compositions, structures, and properties. Each of the 20 amino acids found in proteins has a different side chain that gives it its distinctive chemical properties, as we'll see in Chapter 3. Because they possess both carboxyl and amino groups, amino acids are simultaneously acids and bases. At the pH values commonly found in cells, both the carboxyl and the amino groups are ionized: The carboxyl group has lost a proton, and the amino group has gained one.2.6.2 Isomers have different arrangements of the same atoms 32Isomers are molecules that have the same chemical formula but different arrangements of the atoms. (The prefix "iso-" means "same" and is encountered in many biological terms.) Of the different kinds of isomers, we will consider two: structural isomers and optical isomers. Structural isomers differ in how their atoms are joined together. Consider two simple molecules, each composed of 4 carbon and 10 hydrogen atoms bonded covalently, with the formula C4H10. These atoms can be linked together in two different ways, resulting in two forms of the molecule: The different bonding relationships of butane and isobutane are distinguished in structural formulas, and they have different chemical properties. Many molecules of biological importance, particularly the sugars and amino acids, have optical isomers. Optical isomers occur whenever a carbon atom has four different atoms or groups attached to it. This pattern allows two different ways of making the attachments, each the mirror image of the other. Such a carbon atom is an asymmetric carbon, and the pair of compounds are optical isomers of each other. Your right and left hands are optical isomers. Just as a glove is specific for a particular hand, some biochemical molecules can interact with one optical isomer of a compound, but are unable to "fit" the other. The ( carbon in an amino acid is an asymmetric carbon because it is bonded to four different functional groups. Therefore, amino acids exist in two isomeric forms, called D-amino acids and L-amino acids. "D" and "L" are abbreviations for the Latin terms for right (dextro) and left (levo), respectively. Only L-amino acids are commonly found in most organisms. Between the small molecules we have discussed in this chapter and the world of the living cell stands another level, that of the macromolecules. These huge molecules-the proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids-are the subject of the next chapter.3 Macromolecules: Their Chemistry and BiologyA spider web is an amazing structure. Not only is it beautiful to look at, but it is an architectural wonder that serves as the spider's home, its mating ground, and its means of hunting and capturing food. Consider a fly that happens to intersect with a spider web. The fibers of the web must slow down the fly, but they cannot break, so they must stretch in order to dissipate the energy of the fly's movement. On the other hand, the fibers holding the web together cannot stretch too much, because they must be strong enough to hold the entire structure in place and not let the web wobble out of control. Web fibers are far thinner than human hair, yet they are stronger than steel and, in some cases, more elastic than nylon. In fact, some measurements show that spider silk is as strong as Kevlar, a synthetic substance used to make such items as bulletproof vests and the cords attached to parachutes. Spider silk is composed of slight variations on a single type of huge molecule-a macromolecule-called a protein. The many types of proteins in biological systems are composed of different amounts of the 20 molecules known as amino acids, and spider silks have their own unique selections of these molecules. The silk protein that stretches contains amino acids that allow it to curl into a spiral, and when these spirals associate into silk fibers, they can slip along each other to change the fiber's length. The strong fibers, in contrast, are made up of amino acids that fold the individual proteins into flat sheets, with ratchets that fit parallel sheets together (much like Lego blocks) so that the fibers are hard to pull apart. The relationship between chemical structure and biological function is the theme of this chapter and many of the succeeding ones in this section.The four major types of biological macromolecules-proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids-are composed of building blocks called monomers. In the case of proteins like spider silk, the monomers are amino acids; carbohydrate monomers are sugars, and nucleic acid monomers are nucleotides. Some lipids are composed of a small molecule, glycerol, covalently bonded to larger fatty acids. Lipids interact to form huge macromolecular aggregates, such as the membranes that surround cells. The four kinds of large molecules are are made the same way in all living things, and are present in roughly the same proportions in all organisms. Although an apple tree is obviously different from a person, their basic chemistry is the same, demonstrating the unity of life. This unity makes the study of biochemistry a way to study life in general. A protein that has a certain role in the apple probably has a similar role in the human. One important advantage of biochemical unity is that organisms can eat one another. When you eat an apple, the molecules you take in include carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins that can be re-fashioned into the special varieties of those molecules used by humans. 3.1 Macromolecules: Giant Polymers 34Macromolecules are giant polymers (poly-, "many"; -mer, "unit") constructed by the covalent linking of smaller molecules called monomers. These monomers may or may not be identical, but they always have similar chemical structures. Molecules with molecular weights exceeding 1,000 are usually considered macromolecules, and the proteins, polysaccharides (large carbohydrates), and nucleic acids of living systems certainly fall into this category. Each type of macromolecule performs some combination of a diversity of functions: energy storage, structural support, protection, catalysis, transport, defense, regulation, movement, and heredity. These roles are not necessarily exclusive. For example, both carbohydrates and proteins can play structural roles, supporting and protecting tissues and organisms. However, only nucleic acids specialize in information storage and function as hereditary material, carrying both species and individual traits from generation to generation. The functions of macromolecules are directly related to their shapes and to the chemical properties of their monomers. Some macromolecules, such as catalytic and defensive proteins, fold into compact spherical forms with surface features that make them water-soluble and capable of intimate interaction with other molecules. Other proteins and carbohydrates form long, fibrous systems that provide strength and rigidity to cells and organisms. Still other long, thin assemblies of proteins can contract and cause movement. Because macromolecules are so large, they contain many different functional groups. For example, a large protein may contain hydrophobic, polar, and charged functional groups that give specific properties to local sites on a macromolecule. As we will see, this diversity of properties determines the shapes of macromolecules and their interactions with both other macromolecules and smaller molecules. 3.2 Macromolecules Form by Condensation Reactions 35The polymers of living things are constructed from monomers by a series of reactions called condensation reactions or dehydration reactions (both words refer to the loss of water). Condensation reactions result in covalently bonded monomers. The condensation reactions that produce the different kinds of macromolecules differ in detail, but in all cases, polymers will form only if energy is added to the system. In living systems, specific energy-rich molecules supply this energy. The reverse of a condensation reaction is a hydrolysis reaction (hydro-, "water"; -lysis, "break"). These reactions digest polymers and produce monomers. Water reacts with the bonds that link the polymer together, and the products are free monomers. The elements (H and O) of H2O become part of the products. Like condensation reactions, hydrolysis reactions require the addition of energy to the system. We begin our study of biological macromolecules with a very diverse group of polymers, the proteins. 3.3 Proteins: Polymers of Amino Acids 36Proteins have intricate and diverse structures and perform many different functions. Among the functions of macromolecules listed earlier, only energy storage and heredity are not usually functions of proteins. Proteins are involved in structural support, protection, catalysis, transport, defense, regulation, and movement. Of particular importance are proteins called enzymes that increase the rates of chemical reactions in cells, a function known as catalysis.  In general, each chemical reaction requires a different enzyme, because proteins show great specificity for the smaller molecules with which they interact. Proteins range in size from small ones such as the RNA-digesting enzyme ribonuclease A, which has a molecular weight of 5,733 and 51 amino acid residues, to huge molecules such as the cholesterol transport protein apolipoprotein B, which has a molecular weight of 513,000 and 4,636 amino acid residues. (The word "residue" refers to a monomer when it is part of a polymer.) Each of these proteins consists of a single chain of amino acids (a polypeptide chain) folded into a specific three-dimensional shape that is required for protein function.Some proteins have more than one polypeptide chain. For example, the oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobin has four chains that are folded separately and associate together to make the functional protein. As we will see later in this book, there are many such "multi-protein machines," composed of dozens of interacting polypeptides. Each of these proteins has a characteristic amino acid composition. But not every protein contains all kinds of amino acids, nor an equal number of different ones. The diversity in amino acid content and sequence is the source of the diversity in protein structures and functions. In some cases, additional chemical structures called prosthetic groups may be attached covalently to the protein. These groups include carbohydrates, lipids, phosphate groups, the iron-containing heme group that binds to hemoglobin, and metal ions such as copper and zinc. The next several chapters will describe the many functions of proteins. To understand them, we must first explore protein structure. First, we will examine the properties of the amino acids and how they link to form proteins. Then we will systematically examine protein structure and look at how a linear chain of amino acids is consistently folded into a compact three-dimensional shape. Finally, we will see how this structure provides a specific physical and chemical environment for other molecules that can interact with the protein.3.3.1 Proteins are composed of amino acids 36The 20 amino acids commonly found in proteins have a wide variety of properties. In Chapter 2, we looked at the structure of amino acids and identified four different groups attached to a central (() carbon atom: a hydrogen atom, an amino group (NH3+), a carboxyl group (COO-), and a side chain, or R group. The R groups (R stands for "remainder" or "residue") of amino acids are important in determining the three-dimensional structure and function of the macromolecule. They are highlighted in white in Table 3_2.As Table 3_2 shows, amino acids are grouped and distinguished by their side chains. Some side chains are electrically charged (+1, -1), while others are polar ((+, (-) or nonpolar and hydrophobic. The five amino acids that have electrically charged side chains attract water and oppositely charged ions of all sorts. The four amino acids that have polar side chains tend to form weak hydrogen bonds with water and with other polar or charged substances. Eight amino acids have side chains that are nonpolar hydrocarbons or very slightly modified hydrocarbons. In the watery environment of the cell, the hydrophobic side chains may cluster together. Three amino acids-cysteine, glycine, and proline-are special cases, although their R groups are generally hydrophobic. The cysteine side chain, which has a terminal -SH group, can react with another cysteine side chain to form a covalent bond called a disulfide bridge (-S-S-). Disulfide bridges help determine how a protein chain folds. When cysteine is not part of a disulfide bridge, its side chain is hydrophobic. The glycine side chain consists of a single hydrogen atom and is small enough to fit into tight corners in the interior of a protein molecule, where a larger side chain could not fit. Proline differs from other amino acids because it possesses a modified amino group lacking a hydrogen on its nitrogen, which limits its hydrogen bonding ability. Also, the ring system of proline limits rotation about its ( carbon, so proline is often found at bends or loops in a protein.3.3.2 Peptide linkages covalently bond amino acids together 37When amino acids polymerize, the carboxyl group of one amino acid reacts with the amino group of another, undergoing a condensation reaction that forms a peptide linkage. (In reality, other molecules must activate the amino acids in order for this reaction to proceed, and there are intermediate steps in the process. We will examine these in Chapter 12). Just as a sentence begins with a capital letter and ends with a period, polypeptide chains have a linear order. The chemical "capital letter" marking the beginning of a polypeptide chain is the amino group  of the first amino acid in the chain and is known as the N terminus. The chemical punctuation mark for the end of the chain is the carboxyl group of the last amino acid (the C terminus). All the other amino and carboxyl groups (except those in side chains) are involved in peptide bond formation, so they do not exist in the chain as "free," intact groups. Biochemists refer to the "N ? C," or "amino-to-carboxyl" orientation of polypeptides. The peptide linkage has two characteristics that are important in the three-dimensional structure of proteins. First, in many single covalent bonds, the groups on either side of the bonds are free to rotate in space. This is not so with the C-N peptide bond. The adjacent atoms (the ? carbons of the two adjacent amino acids) are not free to rotate because of the partial double-bond character of the peptide bond. Chemists will realize that this is due to the resonance between the strong electronegativity of the oxygen bound to the carbon and the weak electronegativity of the hydrogen bound to the nitrogen. This characteristic limits the folding of the polypeptide. Second,  the  oxygen bound to the carbon carries a slight negative charge ((-), whereas the hydrogen bound to the nitrogen is slightly positive ((+). This asymmetry of charge favors hydrogen bonding within the protein molecule itself and with other molecules, contributing to both the structure and the function of many proteins.3.3.3 The primary structure of a protein is its amino acid  sequence  38There are four levels of protein structure, called primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary. The precise sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide constitutes the primary structure of a protein 5a).  The peptide backbone of this primary structure consists of a repeating sequence of three atoms (-N-C-C-): the N from the amino group, the ( carbon, and the C from the carboxyl group of each amino acid. Scientists have deduced the primary of many proteins, and use the single-letter abbreviations for amino acids (see Table 3_2) to record the sequence. Here, for example, are the first 25 amino acids (out of a total of 457) for the protein hexokinase, from baker's yeast: AASXDXSLVEVHXXVFIVPPXILQA. The theoretical number of different proteins is enormous. Since there are 20 different amino acids, there are 20 ? 20 = 400 distinct dipeptides (two linked amino acids), and 20 ? 20 ? 20 = 8,000 different tripeptides (three linked amino acids). Imagine this process of multiplying by 20 extended to a protein made up of 100 amino acids (which is considered a small protein). There could be 20100 such small proteins, each with its own distinctive primary structure. How large is the number 20100? In the entire universe there aren't that many electrons! At the higher levels of protein structure, local coiling and folding give the molecule its final functional shape, but all of these levels derive from the primary structure-that is, which amino acids are at which locations on the polypeptide chain. The properties associated with a precise sequence of amino acids determine how the protein can twist and fold. By twisting and folding, each protein adopts a specific stable structure that distinguishes it from every other protein.3.3.4 The secondary structure of a protein requires hydrogen  bonding 38Although the primary structure of each protein is unique, the secondary structures of many different proteins may be quite similar. A protein's secondary structure consists of regular, repeated patterns in different regions of a polypeptide chain. There are two basic types of secondary structure, both of them determined by hydrogen bonding between the amino acid residues that make up the primary structure. The ? (alpha) helix is a right-handed coil that is "threaded" in the same direction as a standard wood screw. The R groups extend outward from the peptide backbone of the helix. The coiling results from hydrogen bonds between the slightly positive hydrogen of the N-H of one amino acid residue and the slightly negative oxygen of the C;dbO of another.  When this pattern of hydrogen bonding is established repeatedly over a segment of the protein, it stabilizes the coil, resulting in an ( helix. Amino acids with large R groups that distort the coil or otherwise prevent the formation of the necessary hydrogen bonds will keep the ( helix from forming. Alpha-helical secondary structure is particularly evident in the insoluble fibrous structural proteins called keratins, which make up hair, hooves, and feathers. Hair can be stretched because stretching requires that only the hydrogen bonds of the ( helix, not the covalent bonds, be broken; when the tension on the hair is released, both the hydrogen bonds and the helix re-form. The ( pleated sheet is formed from two or more polypeptide chains that are almost completely extended and lying next to one another. The sheet is stabilized by hydrogen bonds between the N-H groups on one chain and the C;dbO groups on the other. ( pleated sheets may form between separate polypeptide chains, as in spider silk, or between different regions of the same polypeptide that is bent back on itself. Many proteins contain regions of both ( helix and ( pleated sheet in the same polypeptide chain.3.3.5 The tertiary structure of a protein is formed by bending  and folding 39In many proteins, the polypeptide chain is bent at specific sites and folded back and forth, resulting in the tertiary structure of the protein. Although the ( helices and ( pleated sheets contribute to the tertiary structure, only parts of the macromolecule usually have these secondary structures, and large regions consist of structures unique to a particular protein. While hydrogen bonding is responsible for secondary structure, the interactions between R groups determine tertiary structure. We described the various strong and weak interactions between atoms in Chapter (see Table 2_1). Many of these interactions are involved in determining tertiary structure: Covalent disulfide bridges can form between specific cysteine residues, holding a folded polypeptide in place. Hydrophobic side chains can aggregate together in the interior of the protein, away from water, folding the polypeptide in the process. Van der Waals forces can stabilize the close interactions between the hydrophobic residues. Ionic interactions can occur between positively and negatively charged side chains buried deep within a protein, away from water, forming a salt bridge. A complete description of a protein's tertiary structure specifies the location of every atom in the molecule in three-dimensional space, in relation to all the other atoms. Bear in mind that both tertiary structure and secondary structure derive from the protein's primary structure. If lysozyme is heated slowly, the heat energy will disrupt only the weak interactions and cause only the tertiary structure to break down. But the protein will return to its normal tertiary structure when it cools, demonstrating that all the information needed to specify the unique shape of a protein is contained in its primary structure.3.3.6 The quaternary structure of a protein consists of subunits 40As mentioned earlier, many functional proteins have two or more polypeptide chains, called subunits, each of them folded into its own unique tertiary structure. The protein's quaternary structure results from the ways in which these multiple polypeptide subunits bind together and interact. Quaternary structure is illustrated by hemoglobin. Hydrophobic interactions, Van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonds, and ionic bonds all help hold the four subunits together to form the hemoglobin molecule. The function of hemoglobin is to carry oxygen in red blood cells. As hemoglobin binds one O2 molecule, the four subunits shift their relative positions slightly, changing the quaternary structure. Ionic bonds are broken, exposing buried side chains that enhance the binding of additional O2 molecules. The structure changes again when hemoglobin releases its oxygen molecules to the cells of the body.3.3.7 The surfaces of proteins have specific shapes 40Small molecules in a solution are in constant motion. They vibrate, rotate, and move from place to place like corn in a popper. If two of them collide in the right circumstances, a chemical reaction can occur. The specific shapes of proteins allow them to bind noncovalently with other molecules, which in turn allows other important biological events to occur. For example: Two adjacent cells can stick together because proteins protruding from each of the cells interact with each other (see Chapter 4). A substance can enter a cell by binding tightly to a carrier protein in the cell surface membrane (see Chapter 5). A chemical reaction can be speeded up when an enzyme protein binds to one of the reactants (see Chapter 6). A multi-protein machine, with many components bound to one another in a functionally important way, can catalyze the replication of DNA (see Chapter 11). Another multi-protein machine, the ribosome, can synthesize proteins (see Chapter 12). A protein on a cell's outer surface can bind to a chemical signal such as a hormone (see Chapter 15). Defensive proteins called antibodies can recognize the shape of a virus coat and bind to it (see Chapter 19). When a small molecule collides with and binds to a much larger protein, it is like a baseball being caught by a catcher: The catcher's mitt has a shape that binds to the ball and fits around it. A hockey puck or a ping-pong ball would not fit the baseball mitt. Thus, the binding of a small molecule to a protein involves a general interaction between two three-dimensional objects that becomes more specific after initial binding. When two large polypeptide chains bind to each other, the interactions are more complicated because extensive surfaces of each macromolecule must come into contact, but the principle is the same. Biological specificity depends not just on the shape of a protein, but also on the surface chemical groups that it presents to a substance attempting to bind to it. The groups on the surface are the R groups of the exposed amino acids, and are therefore a property of the protein's primary structure. Look again at the structures of the 20 amino acids in Table 3_2, noting the properties of the R groups. Exposed hydrophobic groups will bind to similarly nonpolar groups in the substance with which the protein interacts (often called the ligand). Charged R groups will bind to oppositely charged groups on theligand. Polar R groups containing a hydroxyl (-OH) group can form a hydrogen bond with an incoming ligand. These three types of interactions-hydrophobic, ionic, and hydrogen bonding-are weak by themselves, but strong when all of them act together. So the exposure of appropriate amino acid R groups on the protein surface allows specific binding of a ligand to occur.3.3.8 Protein shapes are sensitive to the environment 41The three-dimensional structure of a protein determines what it binds and, therefore, its function. The primary structure of a protein constrains its secondary, tertiary, and (if subunits exist) quaternary structures. A major effort in biochemistry is to try to predict three-dimensional protein structure from amino acid sequence. For some short sequences, this is relatively straightforward: for example, certain amino acid sequences will fold into a ( pleated sheet. But for large polypeptide chains, the multitude of potential interactions make structure prediction a problem, approachable only by computer. Indeed, a whole new field of computational biochemistry has emerged to tackle the challenge of structure prediction. Knowing the exact shape of a protein and what can bind to it is important not only in understanding basic biology, but in applied fields such as medicine as well. For example, the three-dimensional structure of  a protease, a protein essential for the replication of HIV-the virus that causes AIDS-was first determined in this way. Then specific inhibitors were designed to interact with its surface. These protease inhibitors have prolonged the lives of countless people living with HIV.Because it is determined by weak forces, protein shape is sensitive to environmental conditions that would not break covalent bonds, but do upset weaker noncovalent interactions. Elevated temperatures, pH changes, or altered salt concentrations can cause a protein to adopt a different, biologically inactive tertiary structure. Increases in temperature cause more rapid molecular movements and thus can break hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions. Alterations in pH can change the pattern of ionization of carboxyl and amino groups in the R groups of amino acids, thus disrupting the pattern of ionic attractions and repulsions that contributes to normal tertiary structure. The loss of normal tertiary structure is called denaturation, and it is always accompanied by a loss of the normal biological function of the protein. Denaturation can be caused by heat or by high concentrations of polar substances such as urea, which disrupt the hydrogen bonding that is crucial to protein structure. Nonpolar solvents may also disrupt normal structure. Usually denaturation is irreversible, because amino acids that were buried may now be exposed, and vice versa, causing a new structure to form or different molecules to bind to the protein. Boiling an egg denatures its proteins and is, as you know, not reversible. However, as we saw earlier, denaturation is often reversible in the laboratory, especially if it was caused originally by disruption of weak forces. If the denaturing chemicals are removed, the protein returns to its "native" shape and normal function.3.3.9 Chaperonins help shape proteins 42There are two occasions when a polypeptide chain is in danger of binding the wrong ligand. First, following denaturation, hydrophobic R groups, previously on the inside of the protein away from water, become exposed on the surface. Since these groups can interact with similar groups on other molecules, the denatured proteins may aggregate and become insoluble, losing their function. Second, when a protein has just been synthesized and has not yet folded completely, it could present a surface that binds the wrong molecule. Living systems limit inappropriate protein interactions by making a class of proteins called, appropriately, chaperonins (recall the chaperones-usually teachers-at school dances who tried to prevent "inappropriate interactions" among the students). Chaperonins were first identified in fruit flies as "heat shock" proteins, which prevented denaturing proteins from clumping together when the flies' temperature was raised. Some chaperonins work by trapping proteins in danger of inappropriate binding inside a molecular "cage". This cage is composed of identical subunits, and is itself a good example of quaternary protein structure. Inside the cage, the targeted protein folds into the right shape, and then is released at the appropriate time and place. 3.4 Carbohydrates: Sugars and Sugar Polymers 43Carbohydrates are a diverse group of compounds containing primarily carbon atoms flanked by hydrogen and hydroxyl groups (H-C-OH). They have two major biochemical roles: They act as a source of energy that can be released in a form usable by body tissues. This energy is stored in strong C-C and C;dbO covalent bonds. They serve as carbon skeletons that can be rearranged to form other molecules important for biological structures and functions. Some carbohydrates are relatively small, with molecular weights less than 100. Others are true macromolecules, with molecular weights in the hundreds of thousands. There are four categories of biologically important carbohydrates, which we will discuss in turn: Monosaccharides (mono-, "one"; saccharide, "sugar"), such as glucose, ribose, or fructose, are simple sugars and are the monomers out of which the larger forms are constructed. Disaccharides (di-, "two") consist of two monosaccharides. Oligosaccharides (oligo-, "several") have several monosaccharides (3 to 20). Polysaccharides (poly-, "many"), such as starch, glycogen, and cellulose, are large polymers composed of hundreds of thousands of monosaccharide units. The relative proportions of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen indicated by the general formula for carbohydrates, CH2O (i.e., the proportions of these molecules are 1:2:1), apply to monosaccharides. In disaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides, these proportions differ slightly from the general formula because two hydrogens and an oxygen are lost during the condensation reactions that form them.3.4.1 Monosaccharides are simple sugars 43Green plants produce monosaccharides through photosynthesis, and animals acquire them directly or indirectly from plants. All living cells contain the monosaccharide glucose. Cells use glucose as an energy source, breaking it down through a series of hydrolysis reactions that release stored energy and produce water and carbon dioxide. Glucose exists in two forms, the straight chain and the ring; the ring structure predominates in more than 99 percent of circumstances. There are also two forms of the ring structure ((-glucose and (-glucose), which differ only in the placement of the -H and -OH attached to carbon 1. The forms interconvert and exist in equilibrium when dissolved in water. Different monosaccharides contain different numbers of carbons. (The standard convention for numbering carbons is used throughout this book.) Most of the monosaccharides found in living systems belong to the D series of optical isomers (see Chapter 2). But some monosaccharides are structural isomers, which have the same kinds and numbers of atoms, but arranged differently by bonding. For example, the hexoses (hex-, "six"), a group of structural isomers, all have the formula C6H12O6. Included among the hexoses are glucose, fructose (so named because it was first found in fruits), mannose, and galactose. Pentoses (pent-, "five") are five-carbon sugars. Some pentoses are found primarily in the cell walls of plants. Two pentoses are of particular biological importance: Ribose and deoxyribose form part of the backbones of the nucleic acids RNA and DNA, respectively. These two pentoses are not isomers; rather, one oxygen atom is missing from carbon 2 in deoxyribose (de-, "absent"). As we will see in Chapter 12, the absence of this oxygen atom has important consequences for the functional distinction of RNA and DNA.3.4.2 Glycosidic linkages bond monosaccharides together 44Monosaccharides are covalently bonded together by condensation reactions that form glycosidic linkages. Such a linkage between two monosaccharides forms a disaccharide. For example, a molecule of sucrose (table sugar) is formed from a glucose and a fructose molecule, while lactose (milk sugar) contains glucose and galactose. The disaccharide maltose contains two glucose molecules. Maltose is not the only disaccharide that can be made from two glucoses. When glucose molecules form glycosidic linkages, the disaccharide product will be one of two types: (-linked or (-linked, depending on whether the molecule that bonds by its carbon 1 is (-glucose or (-glucose. An ( linkage with carbon 4 of a second glucose molecule gives maltose, whereas a ( linkage gives cellobiose. Maltose and cellobiose are disaccharide isomers, both having the formula C12H22O11. However, they are different compounds with different properties. They undergo different chemical reactions and are recognized by different enzymes. For example, maltose can be hydrolyzed to its monosaccharides in the human body, whereas cellobiose cannot. Certain microorganisms have the chemistry to break down cellobiose. Oligosaccharides contain several monosaccharides linked by glycosidic linkages at various sites. Many oligosaccharides have additional functional groups, which give them special properties. Oligosaccharides are often covalently bonded to proteins and lipids on the outer cell surface, where they serve as cell recognition signals. The human blood groups (such as ABO) get their specificity from oligosaccharide chains.3.4.3 Polysaccharides serve as energy stores or structural  materials 45Polysaccharides are giant chains of monosaccharides connected by glycosidic linkages. Starch is a polysaccharide of glucose with glycosidic linkages in the (-orientation. Cellulose, too, is a giant polysaccharide made up solely of glucose, but its individual monosaccharides are connected by (-linkages. Cellulose is the predominant component of plant cell walls, and is by far the most abundant organic compound on Earth. Both starch and cellulose are composed of nothing but glucose, but their very different chemical and physical properties give them distinct biological functions. Starch can be more or less easily degraded by the actions of chemicals or enzymes. Cellulose, however, is chemically more stable because of its (-glycosidic linkages. Thus starch is a good storage medium that can be easily broken down to supply glucose for energy-producing reactions, while cellulose is an excellent structural material that can withstand harsh environmental conditions without changing. Starch actually comprises a large family of giant molecules of broadly similar structure. While all starches are large polymers of glucose with (-linkages, different starches can be distinguished by the amount of branching that occurs at carbons 1 and 6. Some starches are highly branched; others are not. Plant starches, called amylose, are not highly branched. The polysaccharide glycogen, which stores glucose in animal livers and muscles, is highly branched. Starch and glycogen serve as energy storage compounds for plants and animals, respectively. These polysaccharides are readily hydrolyzed to glucose monomers, which in turn can be further degraded to liberate and convert their stored energy to forms that can be used for cellular activities. If it is glucose that is actually needed for fuel, why must it stored as a polymer? The reason is that 1,000 glucose molecules would exert 1,000 times the osmotic pressure (causing water to enter the cells; see Chapter 5) of a single glycogen molecule. If it were not for polysaccharides, many organisms would expend a lot of time and energy expelling excess water.3.4.4 Chemically modified carbohydrates contain other groups 46Some carbohydrates are chemically modified by the addition of functional groups such as phosphate and amino groups. For example, carbon 6 in glucose may be oxidized from -CH2OH to a carboxyl group (-COOH), producing glucuronic acid. Or a phosphate group may be added to one or more of the -OH sites. Some of these sugar phosphates, such as fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, are important intermediates in cellular energy reactions. When an amino group is substituted for an -OH group, amino sugars, such as glucosamine and galactosamine, are produced. These compounds are important in the extracellular matrix, where they form parts of proteins involved in keeping tissues together. Galactosamine is a major component of cartilage, the material that forms caps on the ends of bones and stiffens the protruding parts of the ears and nose. A derivative of glucosamine produces the polymer chitin, which is the principal structural polysaccharide in the skeletons of insects, crabs, and lobsters, as well as in the cell walls of fungi. Fungi and insects (and their relatives) constitute more than 80 percent of the species ever described, and chitin is one of the most abundant substances on Earth. 3.5 Nucleic Acids: Informational Macromolecules 47The nucleic acids are linear polymers specialized for the storage, transmission, and use of information. There are two types of nucleic acids: DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). DNA molecules are giant polymers that encode hereditary information and pass it from generation to generation (through reproduction). Through an RNA intermediate, the information encoded in DNA is also used to make specific proteins. RNA molecules of various types copy the information in segments of DNA to specify the sequence of amino acids in proteins. Information flows from DNA to DNA in reproduction, but in the nonreproductive activities of the cell, information flows from DNA to RNA to proteins, which ultimately carry out these functions. What compositions, structures, and properties of nucleic acids permit them to play these fundamental roles in living systems?3.5.1 The nucleic acids have characteristic structures and  properties 47Nucleic acids are composed of monomers called nucleotides, each of which consists of a pentose sugar, a phosphate group, and a nitrogen-containing base-either a pyrimidine or a purine. (Molecules consisting of a pentose sugar and a nitrogenous base, but no phosphate group, are called nucleosides.) In DNA, the pentose sugar is deoxyribose, which differs from the ribose found in RNA by one oxygen atom. In both RNA and DNA, the backbone of the molecule consists of alternating pentose sugars and phosphates (sugar-phosphate-sugar-phosphate-). The bases are attached to the sugars and project from the chain. The nucleotides are joined by covalent bonds in what are called phosphodiester linkages between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next ("-diester" refers to the two bonds formed by -OH groups reacting with acidic phosphate groups). The phosphate groups link carbon 3 in one pentose sugar to carbon 5 in the adjacent sugar. Most RNA molecules consist of only one polynucleotide chain. DNA, however, is usually double-stranded; it has two polynucleotide chains held together by hydrogen bonding between their nitrogenous bases. The two strands of DNA run in opposite directions. You can see what this means by drawing an arrow through the phosphate group from carbon 3?to carbon 5?in the next ribose. If you do this for both strands, the arrows point in opposite directions. This antiparallel orientation is necessary for the strands to fit together in three-dimensional space.3.5.2 The uniqueness of a nucleic acid resides in its base sequence 48Only four nitrogenous bases-and thus only four nucleotides-are found in DNA. The DNA bases and their abbreviations are adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). A key to understanding the structures and functions of nucleic acids is the principle of complementary base pairing through hydrogen bond formation. In double-stranded DNA, adenine and thymine always pair (AT), and cytosine and guanine always pair (CG). Base pairing is complementary because of three factors: the corresponding sites for hydrogen bonding, the geometry of the sugar-phosphate backbone that brings opposite bases near each other, and the molecular sizes of the paired bases. Adenine and guanine are both purines, consisting of two fused rings. Thymine and cytosine are both pyrimidines, consisting of only one ring. The pairing of a large purine with a small pyrimidine ensures a stable and consistent dimension to the double-stranded molecule of DNA. Ribonucleic acids are also made up of four different monomers, but the nucleotides differ from those of DNA. In RNA the nucleotides are termed ribonucleotides (the ones in DNA are deoxyribonucleotides). They contain ribose rather than deoxyribose, and instead of the base thymine, RNA uses the base uracil (U). The other three bases are the same as in DNA.Although RNA is generally single-stranded, complementary hydrogen bonding between ribonucleotides can take place. These bonds play important roles in determining the shapes of some RNA molecules and in associations between RNA molecules during protein synthesis. During the DNA-directed synthesis of RNA, complementary base pairing also takes place between ribonucleotides and the bases of DNA. In RNA, guanine and cytosine pair (GC) as in DNA, but adenine pairs with uracil (AU). Adenine in an RNA strand can pair either with uracil (in another RNA strand) or with thymine (in a DNA strand). The three-dimensional appearance of DNA is strikingly uniform. Through hydrogen bonding, the two complementary polynucleotide strands pair and twist to form a double helix. When compared with the complex and varied tertiary structures of different proteins, this uniformity is surprising. But this structural contrast makes sense in terms of the functions of these two classes of macromolecules. DNA is a purely informational molecule. The information in DNA is encoded in the sequence of bases carried in its strands. Its variations-the different sequences of bases-are "internal." It can be read easily and reliably, in a specific order. A uniformly shaped molecule like DNA can be interpreted by standard molecular machinery, and any cell's machinery can read any molecule of DNA. Proteins, on the other hand, have good reason to be so varied. In particular, proteins must recognize their own specific "target" molecules. They do this by having a unique three-dimensional form that can match at least a portion of the surface of their target molecules. In other words, structural diversity in the molecules to which proteins bind requires corresponding diversity in the structure of the proteins themselves. In DNA, the information is in the sequence of bases; in proteins, the information is in the shape.3.5.3 DNA is a guide to evolutionary relationships 49Because DNA carries hereditary information between generations, a theoretical series of DNA molecules with changes in base sequences stretches back through evolutionary time. Of course, we cannot study all of these DNA molecules, because many of their organisms have become extinct. However, we can study the DNA of living organisms, which are judged to have changed little through millions of years. Comparisons and contrasts of these DNA molecules can be added to evidence from fossils and other sources to reveal the evolutionary record, as we will see in Chapter 24. Closely related living species should have more similar base sequences than species judged by other criteria to be more distantly related. Indeed, this is the case. The examination of base sequences confirms many of the evolutionary relationships that have been inferred from the more traditional study of body structures or studies of biochemistry and physiology. For example, the closest living relative of humans (Homo sapiens) is the chimpanzee (genus Pan), which shares more than 98 percent of its DNA base sequence with human DNA.This confirmation of well-established evolutionary relationships gives credibility to the use of DNA to elucidate relationships when studies of structure are not possible or are not conclusive. For example, DNA studies revealed a close evolutionary relationship between starlings and mockingbirds that was not expected on the basis of anatomy or behavior. DNA studies support the division of the prokaryotes into two kingdoms (Eubacteria and Archaebacteria). Each of these two groups of prokaryotes is as distinct from the other as either is from the Eukarya, the third kingdom into which living things are classified. In addition, DNA comparisons support the hypothesis that certain subcellular compartments of eukaryotes (the organelles called mitochondria and chloroplasts) evolved from early bacteria that established a stable and mutually beneficial way of life inside larger cells.3.5.4 Nucleotides have other important roles in the cell 49Nucleotides are more than just the building blocks of nucleic acids. As we will describe in later chapters, there are several nucleotides with other functions: ATP (adenosine triphosphate) acts as an energy transducer in many biochemical reactions (see Chapter 6). GTP (guanosine triphosphate) serves as an energy source, especially in protein synthesis. It also has a role in the transfer of information from the environment to the body tissues. cAMP (cyclic AMP), a special nucleotide in which a bond forms between the sugar and phosphate groups within adenosine monophosphate, is essential in many processes, including the actions of hormones and the transmission of information by the nervous system (see Chapter 15). 3.6 Water-Insoluble Molecules 49Lipids are a chemically diverse group of hydrocarbons. The property they all share is an insolubility in water, which is due to the presence of many nonpolar covalent bonds. As we saw in Chapter 2, nonpolar hydrocarbon molecules preferentially aggregate among themselves, away from water, which is polar. When the nonpolar molecules are sufficiently close together, weak but additive van der Waals forces hold them together. These huge macromolecular aggregations are not polymers in a strict chemical sense, since their units (lipid molecules) are not held together by covalent bonds, as are, for example, amino acids in proteins. But they can be considered polymers of individual lipid units. In this section, we will describe the different types of lipids. Lipids have a number of roles in living organisms: Fats and oils store energy. Phospholipids play important structural roles in cell membranes. The carotenoids help plants capture light energy. Steroids and modified fatty acids play regulatory roles as hormones and vitamins. The fat of animal bodies serves as thermal insulation. A lipid coating around nerves acts as electrical insulation. Oil or wax on surfaces of skin, fur, and feathers repel water.3.6.1 Fats and oils store energy 49Chemically, fats and oils are triglycerides, also known as simple lipids. Triglycerides that are solid at room temperature (20¡C) are called fats; those that are liquid at room temperature are called oils. Triglycerides are composed of two types of building blocks: fatty acids and glycerol. Glycerol is a small molecule with three hydroxyl (-OH) groups. Fatty acids are made up of a long nonpolar hydrocarbon chain and a polar carboxyl functional group (-COOH). A triglyceride contains three fatty acid molecules and one molecule of glycerol. The carboxyl group of a fatty acid can react with the  hydroxyl group of glycerol to form an ester (the reaction product of an acid and an alcohol) and water 19). The three fatty acids in a triglyceride molecule need not all have the same hydrocarbon chain length or structure. In saturated fatty acids, all the bonds between the carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon chain are single bonds-there are no double bonds. That is, all the bonds are saturated with hydrogen atoms. These fatty acid molecules are relatively rigid and straight, and they pack together tightly, like pencils in a box.In unsaturated fatty acids, the hydrocarbon chain contains one or more double bonds. Oleic acid, for example, is a monounsaturated fatty acid that has one double bond near the middle of the hydrocarbon chain, which causes a kink in the molecule. Some fatty acids have more than one double bond-are polyunsaturated-and have multiple kinks. These kinks prevent the molecules from packing together tightly. The kinks are important in determining the fluidity and melting point of a lipid. Animal fats are usually solids at room temperature, and their triglycerides tend to have many long-chain saturated fatty acids, packed well together. The triglycerides of plants, such as corn oil, tend to have short or unsaturated fatty acids. Because of their kinks, these fatty acids pack poorly together, and these triglycerides are usually liquid at room temperature. Fats and oils are marvelous storehouses for energy. By taking in excess food, many animal species deposit fat droplets in their cells as a means of storing energy. Some plant species, such as olives, avocados, sesame, castor beans, and all nuts, have substantial amounts of lipids in their seeds or fruits that serve as energy reserves for the next generation. This energy can be tapped by people who eat these plant oils or use them for fuel. Indeed, the famous German engineer Rudolf Diesel used peanut oil to power one of his early automobile engines in 1900. As petroleum stores become depleted, there is some interest in using plant oils commercially as fuel.3.6.2 Phospholipids form the core of biological membranes 51Because lipids and water do not interact, a mixture of water and lipids forms two distinct phases. Many biologically important substances-such as ions, sugars, and free amino acids-that are soluble in water are insoluble in lipids. Like triglycerides, phospholipids contain fatty acids bound to glycerol by ester linkages. In phospholipids, however, any one of several phosphate-containing compounds replaces one of the fatty acids. The phosphate functional group has a negative electric charge, so this portion of the molecule is hydrophilic, attracting polar water molecules. But the two fatty acids are hydrophobic, so they aggregate away from water. In an aqueous environment, phospholipids line up in such a way that the nonpolar, hydrophobic "tails" pack tightly together, and the phosphate-containing "heads" face outward, where they interact with water. The phospholipids thus form a bilayer, a sheet two molecules thick, from which water is excluded. Biological membranes have this kind of lipid bilayer structure, and we will devote all of Chapter 5 to their biological functions. Because the word "lipid" defines compounds in terms of their solubility rather than their structural similarity, a great variety of different chemical structures are included as lipids.3.6.3 Carotenoids and steroids  51The next two lipid classes we'll discuss-the carotenoids and the steroids-have chemical structures very different from those of triglycerides and phospholipids and from each other. Both carotenoids and steroids are synthesized by covalent linking and chemical modification of isoprene to form a series of isoprene units. The carotenoids are a family of light-absorbing pigments found in plants and animals. Beta-carotene ((-carotene) is one of the pigments that traps light energy in leaves during photosynthesis. In humans, a molecule of (-carotene can be broken down into two vitamin A molecules, from which we make the pigment rhodopsin, which is required for vision. Carotenoids are responsible for the colors of carrots, tomatoes, pumpkins, egg yolks, and butter. The steroids are a family of organic compounds whose multiple rings share carbons. The steroid cholesterol is an important constituent of membranes. Other steroids function as hormones, chemical signals that carry messages from one part of the body to another. Testosterone and the estrogens are steroid hormones that regulate sexual development in vertebrates. Cortisol and related hormones play many regulatory roles in the digestion of carbohydrates and proteins, in the maintenance of salt balance and water balance, and in sexual development. Cholesterol is synthesized in the liver and is the starting material for making testosterone and other steroid hormones, as well as the bile salts that help break down dietary fats so that they can be digested. Cholesterol is absorbed from foods such as milk, butter, and animal fats. An excess of cholesterol in the blood can lead to its deposition (along with other substances) in the arteries, a condition that may lead to arteriosclerosis and heart attack.3.6.4 Some lipids are vitamins 52Vitamins are small organic molecules that are not synthesized in the body and must be acquired from dietary sources, and whose deficiencies lead to defined diseases. Vitamin A is formed from (-carotene found in green and yellow vegetables.  Deficiency in vitamin A leads to dry skin, eyes, and internal body surfaces; retarded growth and development; and night blindness, which is a diagnostic symptom for the deficiency. Vitamin D regulates the absorption of calcium from the intestines. It is necessary for the proper deposition of calcium in bones; a deficiency of vitamin D can lead to rickets, a bone-softening disease. Vitamin E seems to protect cells from damaging effects of oxidation-reduction reactions. For example, it has an important role in preventing unhealthy changes in the double bonds in the unsaturated fatty acids of membrane phospholipids. Commercially, vitamin E is added to some foods to slow spoilage. Vitamin K is found in green leafy plants and is also synthesized by bacteria normally present in the human intestine. This vitamin is essential to the formation of blood clots. Predictably, a deficiency of vitamin K leads to slower clot formation and potentially fatal bleeding from a wound.3.6.5 Wax coatings repel water 52The sheen on human hair is not there only for cosmetic purposes. Glands in the skin secrete a waxy coating that repels water and keeps the hair pliable. Birds that live near water have a similar waxy coating on their feathers. The shiny leaves of holly plants, familiar during winter holidays, also have a waxy coating. Finally, bees make their honeycombs out of wax. All waxes have the same basic structure: They are formed by an ester bond between a saturated, long-chain fatty acid and a saturated, long-chain alcohol. The result is a very long molecule, with 40-60 CH2 groups. For example, here is the structure of beeswax: CH3-(CH2)14-CO-O-CH2-(CH2)28-CH3. This highly nonpolar structure accounts for waxes' impermeability to water.3.7 The Interactions of Macromolecules 53We have been treating the classes of macromolecules as if each were completely separate from the others. In cells, however, certain macromolecules of different classes may be covalently bonded to one another. Proteins with attached oligosaccharides are called glycoproteins (glyco-, "sugar"). The specific oligosaccharide chain attached can determine where a newly synthesized protein will reside within the cell. Other carbohydrate chains covalently bond to lipids, resulting in glycolipids, which reside in the cell surface membrane, with the carbohydrate chain extending out into the cell's environment. In humans, the carbohydrates that determine a person's blood type (A, B, AB, or O) are attached to either proteins or lipids sticking out from the surfaces of red blood cells. We have already mentioned the fact that proteins can bind noncovalently to other proteins in quaternary structures. But proteins can bind noncovalently to the other types of macromolecules as well. For example, there are hundreds of different proteins that recognize and bind to DNA, regulating its function. Other proteins, in combination with cholesterol and other lipids, form lipoproteins. Some lipoproteins serve as carrier proteins, which make it possible to move very hydrophobic lipids such as cholesterol through water-rich environments such as the blood and tissue fluid and deliver them to all the body's cells.4 The Organization of CellsJane, an elderly resident of a nursing home, enjoyed visits from her grandchildren. They often brought her gifts, but on this winter day, an unprotected sneeze from one of them led to her catching a cold. Over the next week, she stayed in bed while her body fought off this infection. But while her body was weakened by the cold, a more dangerous event occurred. Tiny bacteria called Streptococcus pneumoniae had been living in Jane's throat for several months, attached to the outside of her tissues by special proteins. Now they began to multiply, invading healthy tissues in her lungs. The lung tissues reacted to this onslaught by swelling-the hallmark of pneumonia. Jane's doctor arrived to find her with shaking chills, chest pain, and a cough that produced a greenish ooze. After capturing some of the green material in a test tube, the physician sent it to a laboratory where the bacteria were clearly seen and a diagnosis of bacterial pneumonia was confirmed. The doctor prescribed antibiotics, which killed the bacteria, and Jane recovered fully within a week. Both the bacteria that caused Jane's pneumonia and the lung tissues they invaded are made up of cells, the units of biological structure and function. Bacteria and lung cells are very different in size and structure. The fundamental differences between them allowed the antibiotic to kill the bacteria causing Jane's illness while sparing the lung cells. Nevertheless, both bacteria and lung cells perform similar biological functions, taking in substances from their environment and refashioning them for their own uses. The next four chapters are about how cells perform their basic functions. In this chapter, we begin by describing the structural features of simple cells, such as bacteria, and more complex ones, like the cells in Jane's lungs. We will discuss cell sizes and shapes,  and we will describe the surface structures and internal compartments that permit cells to transform energy, move, change shape, communicate, and maintain internal conditions that are different from their immediate surroundings. 4.1 The Cell: The Basic Unit of Life 55All organisms are composed of cells. All cells come from preexisting cells. These two statements constitute the cell theory. Just as atoms are the units of chemistry, cells are the building blocks of life 1). They are composed of water molecules and the small and large molecules we examined in the previous two chapters. Each cell contains at least 10,000 different types of molecules, most of them present in many copies. Cells use these molecules to transform matter and energy, to respond to their environment, and to reproduce themselves. The cell theory has two important implications. First, it means that studying cell biology is in some sense the same as studying life. The principles that underlie the functions of the single cell in a bacterium are similar to those governing the 60 trillion cells your body. Second, it means that life in continuous. All those cells in your body came from a single cell, the fertilized egg, which came from the fusion of two cells, a sperm and an egg from your parents, whose cells came from their fertilized eggs, and so on. Of course, at some point in the history of Earth there were no cells and no life. We will describe biologists' ideas on how cells (and life) originated in Chapter 25.4.1.1 Cell size is limited by the surface area-to-volume ratio 55Most cells are tiny. The volume of cells ranges from 1 to 1,000. The eggs of some birds are enormous exceptions, to be sure, and individual cells of several types of algae and bacteria  are large enough to be viewed with the unaided eye. And although neurons (nerve cells) have a volume that is within the "normal" cell range, they often have fine projections that may extend for meters, carrying signals from one part of a large animal to another. But by and large, cells are minuscule. The reason for this relates to the change in the surface area-to-volume ratio (SA/V) of any object as it increases in size. As a cell increases in volume, its surface area also increases, but not to the same extent. This phenomenon has great biological significance because the volume of a cell largely determines the amount of chemical activity it carries out per unit of time, but the surface area determines the amount of substances the cell can take in from the outside environment and the amount of waste products it can release to the environment. As the living cell grows larger, its rate of production of wastes and its need for resources increase faster than the surface area through which it must obtain resources and eliminate wastes. The more limited increase in surface area restricts the increase in volume as the cell grows. This explains why large organisms must consist of many small cells: Cells are small in volume in order to maintain a large surface area-to-volume ratio. In a multicellular organism, the large surface area represented by the multitude of small cells that make up the whole organism enables the multitude of functions required for survival. Special structures transport food, oxygen, and waste materials to and from the small cells that are distant from the external surface of the organism.4.1.2 Microscopes are needed to visualize cells 56Because cells must be so small, they are generally invisible to the human eye. The smallest object a person can typically discern is about 0.2 mm (200 m) in size. We refer to this measure as the resolving power of the human visual system. Resolution is the distance apart two objects must be in order for them to be discerned as separate (if they are closer together, they appear as a single blur). Many cells are much smaller than 200, and even the larger cell types are aboutthat size, so a person might see a dot, but not much else. Microscopes are used to improve resolution so that cells and their internal structures can be seen. There are two basic types of microscopes: light microscopes and electron microscopes. These microscopes are modified to produce different kinds of images. The light microscope (LM) uses glass lenses and visible light to form a magnified image of an object. In its contemporary form, the light microscope has a resolving power of about 0.2 (m), which is 1,000 times that of the human eye. This allows visualization of cell sizes and shapes and some internal cell structures. The latter are hard to see under ordinary light, and so often cells are killed and stained with dyes to make the structures stand out. An electron microscope uses powerful magnets to focus an electron beam, much as the light microscope employs glass lenses to focus a beam of light. Since we cannot see electrons, the electron microscope directs them at a fluorescent screen or a photographic film to create a visible image. The resolving power of electron microscopes is about 0.5 nm, which is 250,000 times finer than that of the human eye. This permits the details of many subcellular structures to be distinguished. Many techniques have been developed to enhance the view of cells under the microscope. For example, specific dyes will form a colored complex with specific types of molecules (proteins or DNA), allowing the general composition of various cell structures to be estimated. There are even reagents that will bind to a specific molecule, such as a particular protein, allowing its distribution in the cell to be ascertained. However, the preparation of biological tissues for microscopy usually involves killing the cells with chemicals that alter cellular molecules and possibly cell structures.4.1.3 All cells are surrounded by a plasma membrane 58A plasma membrane separates each cell from its environment, creating a segregated (but not isolated) compartment. The plasma membrane is composed of a phospholipid bilayer, with the hydrophilic ends of the lipids facing the cell's aqueous interior on one side and the extracellular environment on the other. Proteins are embedded in the lipids. We will devote most of the next chapter to the structure and functions of the plasma membrane, but summarize its roles here: The plasma membrane acts as a selectively permeable barrier, preventing some substances from crossing while permitting other substances to enter and leave the cell. As the cell's boundary with the outside environment, the plasma membrane is important in communicating with adjacent cells and receiving extracellular signals. We will describe this function in Chapter 15. The plasma membrane allows the cell to maintain a more or less constant internal environment. A self-maintaining, constant internal environment is a key characteristic of life and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 40.4.1.4 Cells show two organizational patterns 58Once the microscope was applied to biological samples, it soon became apparent that there are two types of cell structures in the living world. Prokaryotic cell organization is characteristic of the domains Bacteria and Archaea. Organisms in these kingdoms are called prokaryotes. Their cells do not have membrane-enclosed internal compartments. Eukaryotic cell organization is found in the other four kingdoms of living things: Protista, Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia (which constitute the domain Eukarya). The genetic material (DNA) of eukaryotic cells is contained in a special membrane-enclosed compartment called the nucleus. Eukaryotic cells also contain other membrane-enclosed compartments in which specific chemical reactions take place. Organisms with this type of cell are known as eukaryotes. Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have prospered through many hundreds of millions of years of evolution, and both are great success stories. Let's look first at prokaryotic cells.4.2 Prokaryotic Cells 58Prokaryotes are very diverse in their biochemical capabilities. They can live off a greater diversity of energy sources than any other living creatures, and they inhabit greater environmental extremes, such as very hot springs and very salty water. The vast diversity within the prokaryotic kingdoms is the subject of Chapter 26. Prokaryotic cells are generally smaller than eukaryotic cells, ranging in dimensions from 0.25 _ 1.2 (m to 1.5 _ 4 (m. So they are generally visible by light microscopy, although their substructures are visible only by electron microscopy. Although each prokaryote is a single cell, many types of prokaryotes are usually seen in chains, small clusters, or even clusters containing hundreds of individuals. In this section, we will first consider the features that cells in the kingdoms Bacteria and Archaea have in common. Then we will examine structural features that are found in some, but not all, prokaryotes.4.2.1 All prokaryotic cells share certain features 58All prokaryotic cells have the same basic structure. The plasma membrane encloses the cell, regulating the traffic of materials into and out of the cell and separating it from its environment. A region called the nucleoid contains the hereditary material (DNA) of the cell. The rest of the material enclosed by the plasma membrane is called the cytoplasm. It is made up of two parts: the liquid cytosol, and insoluble suspended particles, including ribosomes: The cytosol consists mostly of water that contains dissolved ions, small molecules, and soluble macromolecules such as proteins. Ribosomes are granules about 25 nm in diameter that are sites of protein synthesis.Although structurally less complicated than eukaryotic cells, prokaryotic cells are functionally complex, carrying out thousands of chemical transformations.4.2.2 Some prokaryotic cells have specialized features 58Many prokaryotic cells have at least a few structural complexities. For example, most prokaryotes have a cell wall located outside the plasma membrane. The rigidity of the cell wall supports the cell and determines its shape. The cell walls of most bacteria, but not archaea, contain peptidoglycan, a polymer of amino sugars, cross-linked by covalent bonds to form a single giant molecule around the entire cell. In some bacteria, another layer-the outer membrane (a polysaccharide-rich phospholipid membrane)-encloses the cell wall. Unlike the plasma membrane, this outer membrane is not a major permeability barrier, and some of its polysaccharides are disease-causing toxins. Enclosing the cell wall and outer membrane in some bacteria is a layer of slime, composed mostly of polysaccharides and referred to as a capsule. The capsules of some bacteria may protect them from attack by white blood cells in the animals they infect. The capsule helps keep the cell from drying out, and sometimes it traps other cells for the bacterium to attack. Many prokaryotes produce no capsule at all, and those that do have capsules can survive even if they lose them, so the capsule is not a structure essential to cell life.
Some groups of bacteria-the cyanobacteria and some others-carry on photosynthesis. In photosynthesis, the energy of sunlight is converted to chemical energy that can be used for a variety of energy-requiring reactions, such as the synthesis of cellular proteins and DNA. In these photosynthetic bacteria, the plasma membrane folds into the cytoplasm to form an internal membrane system that contains bacterial chlorophyll and other compounds needed for photosynthesis. Other groups of prokaryotes possess different types of membranous structures called mesosomes, which may function in cell division or in various energy-releasing reactions. Like the photosynthetic membrane systems, mesosomes are formed by infolding of the plasma membrane. They remain attached to the plasma membrane and never form the free-floating, separate membranous organelles that are characteristic of eukaryotic cells. Some prokaryotes swim by using appendages called flagella. A single flagellum, made of a protein called flagellin, looks at times like a tiny corkscrew. It spins on its axis like a propeller, driving the cell along. Ring structures anchor the flagellum to the plasma membrane and, in some bacteria, to the outer membrane of the cell wall. We know that the flagella cause the motion of the cell because if they are removed, the cell cannot move. Pili project from the surface of some groups of bacteria. Shorter than flagella, these threadlike structures seem to help bacteria adhere to one another during mating, as well as to animal cells for protection and food. 4.3 Eukaryotic Cells 59Animals, plants, fungi, and protists have cells that are usually larger and structurally more complex than those of the prokaryotes. To get a sense of the most prominent differences, compare the plant and animal cells, eukaryotic cells and prokaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells generally have dimensions ten times greater than those of prokaryotes; for example, the spherical yeast cell has a diameter of 8 (m. Like prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes. But added on to this basic organization are two elements not found in prokaryotes: An internal cytoskeleton that maintains cell shape and moves materials; Membranous compartments in the cytoplasm whose interiors are separated from the cytosol by a membrane.4.3.1 Compartmentalization is the key to eukaryotic cell function 62Recall that prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a plasma membrane that regulates molecular traffic into and out of the cell. In addition, eukaryotic cells have "cells within cells"-interior compartments surrounded by membranes that regulate what enters or leaves that compartment. The membranes ensure that conditions inside the compartment are different from those in the surrounding cytoplasm. Some of the compartments are like little factories that make specific products. Others are like power plants that take in energy in one form and convert it to a more useful form. These membranous compartments, as well as other structures (such as ribosomes) that lack membranes but possess distinctive shapes and functions, are called organelles. Each of these organelles has specific roles in its particular cell. These roles are defined by chemical reactions. The nucleus contains most of the cell's genetic material (DNA). It determines the expression of this material as cell functions and its duplication when the cell reproduces. The mitochondrion is a power plant and industrial park, where energy stored in the bonds of carbohydrates is converted to a form more useful to the cell and certain essential biochemical conversions of amino acids and fatty acids occur. The endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus make up a compartment where proteins are packaged and sent to appropriate locations in the cell. The lysosome and vacuole are cellular digestive systems, where large molecules are hydrolyzed into usable monomers. The chloroplast performs photosynthesis.All of these organelles have unique chemical compositions and functions. The membrane surrounding each does two essential things: First, it keeps the organelle's molecules away from other molecules in the cell with which they might react inappropriately. Second, it acts as a traffic regulator, letting important raw materials into the organelle and releasing its products to the cytoplasm.4.3.2Organelles that Process Information 63Living things depend on accurate, appropriate information-internal signals, environmental cues, and stored instructions-to respond appropriately to changing conditions and maintain a constant internal environment. In the cell, information is stored as the sequence of nucleotides in DNA molecules. Most DNA in eukaryotic cells resides in the nucleus. Information is translated from the language of DNA into the language of proteins on the surface of the ribosomes. (This process is described in detail in Chapter 12).4.3.3 The nucleus stores most of the cell's DNA 63The single nucleus is usually the largest organelle in a cell. The nucleus of most animal cells is approximately 5 (m in diameter-substantially larger than most entire prokaryotic cells. The nucleus has several roles in the cell: The nucleus is the site of DNA duplication to support cell reproduction, The nucleus is the site of DNA control of cellular activities. A region within the nucleus, called the nucleolus, begins the assembly of ribosomes from specific proteins and RNA.The nucleus is surrounded by two membranes, which together form the nuclear envelope. The two membranes of the nuclear envelope are separated by only a few tens of nanometers and are perforated by nuclear pores approximately 9 nm in diameter, which connect the interior of the nucleus with the cytoplasm. At these pores, the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope is continuous with the inner membrane. Each pore is surrounded by a pore complex: eight large protein granules arranged in an octagon where the inner and outer membranes merge. RNA and water-soluble molecules pass through these pores to enter or leave the nucleus.At certain sites, the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope folds outward into the cytoplasm and is continuous with the membrane of another organelle, the endoplasmic reticulum (discussed later in the chapter). Inside the nucleus, DNA combines with proteins to form a fibrous complex called chromatin. These are exceedingly long, thin, entangled threads that, prior to cell division, condense to form readily visible objects called chromosomes. Surrounding the chromatin are water and dissolved substances collectively referred to as the nucleoplasm. Within the nucleoplasm, a network of apparently structural proteins called the nuclear matrix organizes the chromatin. At the periphery of the nucleus, the chromatin attaches to a protein meshwork, called the nuclear lamina, which is formed by the polymerization of proteins called lamins into filaments. The nuclear lamina maintains the shape of the nucleus by its attachment to both chromatin and the nuclear envelope. During most of the life cycle of the cell, the nuclear envelope is a stable structure. When the cell divides, however, the nuclear envelope fragments into pieces of membrane with attached pore complexes. The envelope re-forms when distribution of the duplicated DNA to the daughter cells is completed.4.3.4 Ribosomes are the sites of protein synthesis 64In both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, proteins are synthesized on thousands of ribosomes. Ribosomes are tiny granules found in three places in almost all eukaryotic cells: free in the cytoplasm, attached to the surface of endoplasmic reticulum (as will be described later in this chapter), and inside the mitochondria, where energy is processed. Ribosomes are also found in chloroplasts, the photosynthetic organelles of plant cells. In each of these locations, the ribosomes provide the sites where proteins are synthesized under the direction of nucleic acids. Although they seem small in comparison to the cell in which they are contained, ribosomes are huge machines composed of several dozen kinds of molecules interacting to synthesize proteins.The ribosomes of prokaryotes and of eukaryotes are similar in that both consist of two different-sized subunits. Eukaryotic ribosomes are somewhat larger, but the structure of prokaryotic ribosomes is better understood. Chemically, ribosomes consist of a special type of RNA, called ribosomal RNA, to which more than 50 different protein molecules are noncovalently bound. 4.4 The Endomembrane System 64Much of the volume of some eukaryotic cells is taken up by an extensive endomembrane system. This system includes two main components, the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. Continuities between the nuclear envelope and the endomembrane system are visible by electron microscopy. Tiny vesicles appear to shuttle between the various components of the endomembrane system. This system has various structures, but all of them are essentially compartments, closed off by their membranes from the soluble cytoplasm. In this section, we will examine the functional significance of these compartments, and show that materials synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum can be transferred to another organelle, the Golgi apparatus, for further processing, storage, or transport. We will also describe the role of the lysosome in cell digestion.4.4.1 The endoplasmic reticulum is a complex factory 64Electron micrographs reveal a network of interconnected membranes branching throughout the cytoplasm, forming tubes and flattened sacs. These membranes are collectively called the endoplasmic reticulum, or ER. The interior compartment of the ER, referred to as the lumen, is separate and distinct from the surrounding cytoplasm. The surface area of the ER can occupy up to 15 percent of the entire interior volume of the cell, and its foldings result in a surface area many times greater than that of the plasma membrane. At certain sites, the ER is continuous with the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope. Parts of the ER are liberally sprinkled with ribosomes, which are temporarily attached to the outer faces of the flattened sacs. Because of their appearance in the electron microscope, these regions are called rough ER, or RER. RER has two roles: As a compartment, it segregates certain newly synthesized proteins away from the cytoplasm and transports them to other locations in the cell. While inside the RER, proteins can be chemically modified so as to alter their function and intracellular destination. The attached ribosomes are sites for the synthesis of proteins that function outside the cytosol-that is, proteins that are to be exported from the cell, incorporated into membranes, or moved into organelles of the endomembrane system. These proteins enter the lumen of the ER as they are synthesized. Once in the lumen of the ER, these proteins undergo several changes, including the formation of disulfide bridges and folding into their tertiary structures. Proteins gain carbohydrate groups in the RER, thus becoming glycoproteins. The carbohydrate groups are part of an "addressing" system that ensures that the right proteins are directed to the right parts of the cell. Some parts of the endoplasmic reticulum, called the smooth ER or SER, are more tubular (less like flattened sacs) and lack ribosomes. Within the lumen of the SER, proteins that have been synthesized on the RER are chemically modified. In addition, the SER has two other important roles: It is responsible for chemically modifying small molecules taken in by the cell. This is especially true for drugs and pesticides. It is the site for the hydrolysis of glycogen and the synthesis of steroids. Cells that synthesize a lot of protein for export are usually packed with ER. Examples include glandular cells that secrete digestive enzymes and plasma cells that secrete antibodies. In contrast, cells that carry out less protein synthesis (such as storage cells) contain less ER.4.4.2 The Golgi apparatus stores, modifies, and packages proteins 65In 1898, the Italian microscopist Camillo Golgi discovered a delicate structure in nerve cells, which came to be known as the Golgi apparatus. Because of the resolution limits of light microscopy, and because the staining techniques of the time often failed to reveal the structure, many biologists regarded it as a product of Golgi's imagination. In the late 1950s, however, the electron microscope showed clearly that the Golgi apparatus does exist-and not just in nerve cells, but in most eukaryotic cells. The exact appearance of the Golgi apparatus varies from species to species, but it always consists of flattened membranous sacs called cisternae and small membrane-enclosed vesicles. The cisternae appear to be lying together like a stack of saucers. The entire apparatus is about 1 m long. The Golgi apparatus has several roles: It receives proteins from the ER and chemically modifies them. Proteins within the Golgi apparatus are concentrated, packaged, and sorted before being sent to their cellular or extracellular destinations. The Golgi apparatus is where some polysaccharides for the plant cell wall are synthesized. In the cells of plants, protists, fungi, and many invertebrate animals, the stacks of cisternae are individual units scattered throughout the cytoplasm. In vertebrate cells, a few such stacks usually form a larger, single, more complex Golgi apparatus.The Golgi appears to have three functionally distinct parts: a bottom, a middle, and a top. The bottom cisternae, constituting the cis region of the Golgi apparatus, lie nearest to the nucleus or a patch of RER. The top cisternae, constituting the trans region, lie closest to the surface of the cell. The cisternae in the middle make up the medial region of the complex. These three parts of the Golgi apparatus contain different enzymes and perform different functions. The Golgi apparatus receives proteins from the ER, packages them, and sends them on their way. The chemical modifications made to proteins within the Golgi apparatus generally "tag" them to their proper destinations-a process we will describe further in Chapter 12. So in some sense the Golgi apparatus is a "post office" for the cell. Since there is often no direct membrane continuity between ER and Golgi apparatus, how does a protein get from one organelle to the other? The protein could simply leave the ER, travel across the cytoplasm, and enter the Golgi apparatus. But this would expose the protein to interactions with other molecules in the cytoplasm. On the other hand, segregation from the cytoplasm could be maintained if a piece of the ER could "bud off," forming a vesicle that contains the target protein-and this is in fact exactly what happens. The protein makes the passage from ER to Golgi apparatus safely enclosed in the vesicle. Once it arrives, the vesicle fuses with the membrane of the Golgi apparatus, releasing its cargo. Vesicles form from the rough ER, move through the cytoplasm, and fuse with the cis region of the Golgi apparatus, where their contents are released into the lumen of the Golgi. Other small vesicles may move between the cisternae, transporting proteins. Associated with thecisternae, particularly those toward the trans region, are tiny vesicles that pinch off and move to other cisternae or away from the Golgi. The membranes of two vesicles can sometimes make contact with each other and fuse, resulting in a larger vesicle and a mixing of the contents. Vesicles may also fuse with other organelles, or with the plasma membrane, where they release their contents to the outside of the cell. The formation, transport, and fusing behavior of vesicles is essential to the function of the Golgi apparatus. Structurally, vesicles are the transport vehicles into and out of the Golgi apparatus and to the ultimate destinations of the proteins.4.4.3 Lysosomes contain digestive enzymes 66Originating in part from the Golgi apparatus are organelles called lysosomes. They contain digestive enzymes, and they are the sites of hydrolysis of macromolecules-proteins, polysaccharides, nucleic acids, and lipids-to their monomers. Lysosomes are about 1 (m in diameter, are surrounded by a single membrane, and have a densely staining, featureless interior. There may be dozens of lysosomes in a cell, depending on its needs. Lysosomes are sites for the breakdown of food and foreign objects taken up by the cell. How do these materials get into the cell in the first place? In a process called phagocytosis (phago-, "eating"; cytosis, "cellular"), a pocket forms in the plasma membrane and eventually deepens and encloses material from outside the cell. This pocket becomes a small vesicle and breaks free of the plasma membrane to move into the cytoplasm as a phagosome containing food or other material. The phagosome fuses with a primary lysosome to form a secondary lysosome, where digestion occurs. The effect of this fusion is rather like releasing hungry foxes into a chicken coop. The enzymes in the secondary lysosome quickly hydrolyze the food particles. These reactions are enhanced by the mild acidity of the lysosome's interior, where the pH is lower than in the surrounding cytoplasm. The products of digestion exit through the membrane of the lysosome, providing fuel molecules and raw materials for other cell processes. The "used" secondary lysosome containing undigested particles then moves to the plasma membrane, fuses with it, and releases the undigested contents to the environment. Lysosomes are also where the cell digests its own material in a process called autophagy. Autophagy is an ongoing process, in which macromolecules such as proteins are engulfed by lysosomes and hydrolyzed to amino acids, which pass out of the lysosome through its membrane into the cytoplasm for reuse. Plant cells do not appear to contain lysosomes, but the central vacuole of a plant cell may function in an equivalent capacity because it, like lysosomes, contains many digestive enzymes. 4.5 Organelles that Process Energy 67A cell uses energy to transform raw materials into cell-specific materials that it can use for activities such as growth, reproduction, and movement. Energy is transformed from one form to another in mitochondria (found in all eukaryotic cells) and in chloroplasts (found in eukaryotic cells that harvest energy from sunlight). In contrast, energy transformations in prokaryotic cells are associated with enzymes attached to the inner surface of the plasma membrane or extensions of the plasma membrane that protrude into the cytoplasm.4.5.1 Mitochondria are energy transformers 68In eukaryotic cells, the utilization of food molecules such as glucose begins in the cytosol. The fuel molecules that result from partial degradation of this food enter the mitochondria (singular mitochondrion), whose primary function is to convert the potential chemical energy of fuel molecules into a form that the cell can use: the energy-rich molecule called ATP, or adenosine triphosphate. ATP is not a long-term energy storage form, but rather a kind of energy currency. Its role in the cell is analogous to the role of paper money and coins in an economy. Chemically, ATP can participate in a great number of different cellular reactions and processes that require energy. In the mitochondria, the production of ATP using fuel molecules and O2 is called cellular respiration. Typical mitochondria are small-somewhat less than 1.5 (m in diameter and 2-8 (m in length-about the size of many bacteria. Mitochondria are visible with a light microscope, but almost nothing was known of their precise structure until they were examined with the electron microscope. Electron micrographs revealed that mitochondria have two membranes. The outer membrane is smooth and protective, and it offers little resistance to the movement of substances into and out of the mitochondrion. Immediately inside the outer mitochondrial membrane is an inner membrane, which folds inward in many places, giving it a much greater surface area than that of the outer membrane. These folds tend to be quite regular, giving rise to shelflike structures called cristae. The inner mitochondrial membrane contains many large protein molecules that participate in cellular respiration and the production of ATP. The inner membrane exerts much more control over what enters and leaves the mitochondrion than does the outer membrane. The region enclosed by the inner membrane is referred to as the mitochondrial matrix. In addition to many proteins, the matrix contains some ribosomes and DNA that are used to make some of the proteins needed for cellular respiration. The number of mitochondria per cell ranges from one contorted giant in some unicellular protists to a few hundred thousand in large egg cells. An average human liver cell contains more than a thousand mitochondria. Cells that require the most chemical energy tend to have the most mitochondria per unit of volume. In Chapter 7 we will see how the different parts of the mitochondrion work together in cellular respiration.4.5.2 Plastids photosynthesize or store materials 68One class of organelles-the plastids-is produced only in plants and certain protists. There are several types of plastids, with different functions. The most familiar of the plastids is the chloroplast, which contains the green pigment chlorophyll and is the site of photosynthesis. In photosynthesis, light energy is converted into the chemical energy of bonds between atoms. The molecules formed in photosynthesis provide food for plants themselves and for other organisms that eat plants. Directly or indirectly, photosynthesis is the energy source for most of the living world. Chloroplasts are quite variable in size and shape. Like the mitochondrion, the chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes. Arising from the inner membrane is a series of discrete internal membranes whose structure and arrangement vary from one group of photosynthetic organisms to another. Here we concentrate on the chloroplasts of the flowering plants. Even these show some variation. As seen in electron micrographs, the internal membranes of chloroplasts look like stacks of flat, hollow pita bread. These stacks, called grana (singular granum), consist of a series of flat, closely packed, circular compartments called thylakoids. In addition to phospholipids and proteins, the membranes of the thylakoids contain molecules of the green pigment chlorophyll and the yellow-orange carotenoids. These two pigment families harvest light for photosynthesis. Thylakoids of one granum may be connected to those of other grana, making the interior of the chloroplast a highly developed network of membranes, much like the ER. The fluid in which the grana are suspended is referred to as stroma. Like the mitochondrial matrix, the chloroplast stroma contains ribosomes and DNA, and these are used to synthesize some, but not all, of the proteins that make up the chloroplast. Animal cells do not produce chloroplasts, but some do contain functional chloroplasts. These are either taken up as free chloroplasts derived from the partial digestion of green plants, or contained within unicellular algae that live within the animal's tissues. The green color of some corals and sea anemones results from chloroplasts in algae that live within those animals. The animals derive some of their nutrition from the photosynthesis that their chloroplast-containing "guests" carry out. Such an intimate relationship between two different organisms is called symbiosis. The red color of a ripe tomato results from the presence of legions of plastids called chromoplasts. Just as chloroplasts derive their color from chlorophyll, chromoplasts are red, orange, or yellow depending on the kinds of carotenoid pigments present. The chromoplasts have no known chemical function in the cell, but the colors they give to some petals and fruits probably help attract animals that assist in pollination or seed dispersal. (On the other hand, carrot roots gain no apparent advantage from being orange.) Other plastids, called leucoplasts, are storage depots for starch and fats.4.5.3 Mitochondria and chloroplasts may have an endosymbiotic origin70Chloroplasts and mitochondria are about the size of prokaryotic cells. They contain DNA and have ribosomes that are similar to prokaryotic ribosomes. And these organelles reproduce and divide within the cell to produce additional mitochondria and chloroplasts. But they are by no means autonomous. Although they have the genetic material and protein synthesis machinery needed to make some of their own components, they are not independent of control by the nucleus. The vast majority of their proteins are encoded by nuclear DNA, made in the cytoplasm, and imported into the organelle. These observations have led to speculation on the origin of these organelles.  One proposal for this origin is the endosymbiosis theory of the origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts, which envisions the following scenario: About 2 billion years ago, only prokaryotes inhabited Earth. Some of them absorbed their food directly from the environment. Others were photosynthetic. Still others fed on smaller prokaryotes by engulfing them. Under these conditions, suppose that a small, photosynthetic prokaryote was ingested by a larger one, but was not digested. Instead, it survived trapped within a vesicle in the cytoplasm of the larger cell. The smaller, ingested prokaryote divided at about the same rate as the larger one, so successive generations of the larger cell also contained the offspring of the smaller one. We call this phenomenon endosymbiosis (endo-, "within"; symbiosis, "living together"); as it is comparable to the algae that live within sea anemones.According to this scenario, endosymbiosis provided benefits for both organisms. The larger cell obtained the photosynthetic products from the smaller cell, and the smaller cell was protected by the larger one. The smaller cell gradually lost much of its DNA to the nucleus, resulting in the modern chloroplast. There is much circumstantial evidence favoring this theory. Chloroplast DNA sequences are much more like certain prokaryotic sequences than like any plant DNA. Moreover, on an evolutionary time scale of millions of years, there is evidence for DNA moving between organelles in a cell. Finally, there are many biochemical similarities between chloroplasts and modern bacteria. Similar evidence and arguments also support the proposition that mitochondria are the descendants of respiring prokaryotes engulfed by, and ultimately endosymbiotic with, larger prokaryotes. The benefits of this endosymbiotic relationship might have been due to the capacity of the engulfed prokaryote to detoxify molecular oxygen (O2), which was increasing in Earth's atmosphere because of photosynthesis. However, mitochondria and chloroplasts are not enough to turn a prokaryote into a eukaryote. The endosymbiosis theory is still incomplete. For example, the origins of the nuclear envelope and other important structures-including those responsible for nuclear division-still need to be understood. We discuss further aspects of the origin of the eukaryotic cell in Chapter 26. 4.6 Other Organelles 71In addition to the information-processing organelles (nucleus and ribosomes), the energy-processing organelles (mitochondria and chloroplasts), and the organelles of the endomembrane system (endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes), there are two other kinds of membrane-enclosed organelles: peroxisomes and vacuoles. Both are surrounded by a single membrane.4.6.1 Peroxisomes house specialized chemical reactions 71Peroxisomes are small organelles-0.2 to 1.7 (m in diameter. They have a single membrane and a granular interior. Peroxisomes are found at one time or another in at least some of the cells of almost every eukaryotic species. Peroxisomes are organelles within which toxic peroxides (such as hydrogen peroxide, H2O2) are formed as unavoidable side products of chemical reactions. Subsequently, the peroxides are safely broken down within the peroxisomes without mixing with other parts of the cell. A structurally similar organelle, the glyoxysome, is found only in plants. Glyoxysomes, which are most prominent in young plants, are the sites where stored lipids are converted into carbohydrates for transport to growing cells.4.6.2 Vacuoles are filled with water and soluble substances 71Many eukaryotic cells, but particularly those of plants and protists, contain membrane-enclosed organelles that look empty under the electron microscope. These organelles are called vacuoles. They are not actually empty; rather, they are filled with aqueous solutions that contain many dissolved substances. Despite their structural simplicity, vacuoles have a variety of functions in the lives of cells. For example, like animals and other organisms, plant cells produce a number of toxic by-products and waste materials. Animals have specialized excretory mechanisms for getting rid of such wastes, but plants do not. Although plants can secrete some wastes to their environment, many are simply stored within vacuoles. And since they are poisonous or distasteful, these stored materials deter some animals from eating the plants. Thus stored wastes may contribute to plant survival. In many plant cells, enormous vacuoles take up more than 90 percent of the cellular volume and grow as the cell grows. But vacuoles are by no means a waste of space, for the dissolved substances in the vacuole, working together with the vacuolar membrane, provide the turgor, or stiffness, of the cell, which in turn provides support for the structure of nonwoody plants. The presence of the dissolved substances causes water to enter the vacuole, making it tend to swell like a balloon. Plant cells have a rigid cell wall, which acts like a box, resisting the swelling of the vacuole but providing strength in the process.Vacuoles even play a role in the sex life of plants. Some pigments (especially blue and pink ones) in petals and fruits are contained in vacuoles. These pigments-the anthocyanins-are visual cues that encourage animals to visit flowers and thus aid in pollination, or to eat fruits and thus aid in seed dispersal. Food vacuoles are found in some simple and evolutionarily ancient groups of organisms: single-celled protists and simple multicellular organisms such as sponges. In these organisms, the cells engulf food particles by phagocytosis, generating a food vacuole. Fusion of this vacuole with a lysosome results in digestion, and small molecules leave the vacuole and enter the cytoplasm for use or distribution to other organelles. Many freshwater protists also have a highly specialized contractile vacuole. Its function is to rid the cell of the excess water that rushes in because of the imbalance in salt concentration between the relatively salty interior of the cell and its freshwater environment. The contractile vacuole visibly enlarges as water enters, then abruptly contracts, forcing the water out of the cell through a special pore structure.4.7 The Cytoskeleton 72In addition to the many membrane-enclosed organelles, the cytoplasm contains a dynamic set of long, thin fibers called the cytoskeleton, which fills at least three important roles: It maintains cell shape and support. It provides for various types of cell movement. Some of its fibers act as tracks or supports for "motor proteins," which help the cell move or move things within the cell. In the discussion that follows, we'll look at three components of the cytoskeleton: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules.4.7.1 Microfilaments function in support and movement 72Microfilaments can exist as single filaments, in bundles, or in networks. They are about 7 nm in diameter and several (m long. They are assembled from actin, a protein that exists in several forms and has many function among members of the animal phyla. The actin found in microfilaments (which are also known as actin filaments) is extensively folded and has distinct "head" and "tail" sites. These sites interact with similar actin molecules to assemble into a long chain. Two of these chains interact to form the double helix of a microfilament. The polymerization of actin into microfilaments is reversible, and microfilaments can disappear from cells, breaking down into units of free actin. Microfilaments have two major roles: They help the entire cell or parts of the cell to contract. They stabilize cell shape. In muscle cells, actin fibers are associated with another protein called myosin, and their interactions account for the contraction of muscles. In nonmuscle cells, actin fibers are associated with localized changes of shape in cells. For example, microfilaments are involved in a flowing movement of the cytoplasm called cytoplasmic streaming, in movements of specific organelles and particles within cells, and in the "pinching" contractions that divide an animal cell into two daughter cells. Microfilaments are also involved in the formation of cellular extensions, called pseudopodia (pseudo-, "false;" podia, "feet"), that enable cells to move. In some cell types, microfilaments form a meshwork just inside the plasma membrane. Actin-binding proteins then cross-link the microtubules to form a rigid structure that supports the cell. For example, microfilaments support the tiny microvilli that line the intestine, giving it a larger surface area through which to absorb nutrients. Such a "submembrane skeleton" also helps keep the red blood cell in its familiar doughnut shape.4.7.2 Intermediate filaments are tough supporting elements 74Intermediate filaments are found only in multicellular organisms. Although there are at least five distinct types of intermediate filaments, all share the same general structure and are composed of fibrous proteins of the keratin family, similar to the protein that makes up hair and fingernails. In cells, these proteins are organized into tough, ropelike assemblages 8 to 12 nm in diameter. Intermediate filaments have two major structural functions: They stabilize cell structure. They resist tension. In some cells, intermediate filaments radiate from the nuclear envelope and may maintain the positions of the nucleus and other organelles in the cell. The lamins of the nuclear lamina are intermediate filaments. Other kinds of intermediate filaments help hold a complex apparatus of microfilaments in place in muscle cells. Still other kinds stabilize and help maintain rigidity in surface tissues by connecting "spot welds" called desmosomes between adjacent cells.4.7.3 Microtubules are long and hollow 74Microtubules are long, hollow, unbranched cylinders about 25 nm in diameter and up to several micrometers long. Assembled from molecules of the protein tubulin, microtubules have two roles: They form a rigid internal skeleton for some cells, especially at cell extensions. They act as a framework on which motor proteins can move structures in the cell. Tubulin is a dimer made up of two polypeptide monomers, called (-tubulin and (-tubulin. Thirteen rows, of tubulin dimers surround the central cavity of the microtubule. The two ends of a microtubule are different. One end is designated the + end, the other the - end. Tubulin dimers can be added or subtracted mainly at the + end, lengthening or shortening the microtubule. This capacity to change length rapidly makes microtubules dynamic structures. This dynamic property is seen in animal cells, where microtubules are often found in parts of the cell that are changing shape. Many microtubules radiate from a region of the cell called the microtubule organizing center. Tubule polymerization results in a rigid cell, and tubule depolymerization leads to a collapse of this rigid structure. In plants, microtubules help control the arrangement of the cellulose fibers of the cell wall. Electron micrographs of plants frequently show microtubules lying just inside the plasma membrane of cells that are forming or extending their cell walls. Experimental alteration of the orientation of these microtubules leads to a similar change in the cell wall, and a new shape for the cell. In many cells, microtubules serve as tracks for motor proteins, specialized molecules that use energy to change their shape and move. Motor proteins bond to and move along the microtubules, carrying materials from one part of the cell to another. Microtubules are also essential in distributing chromosomes to daughter cells during cell division. And they are intimately associated with movable cell appendages: the flagella and cilia.4.7.4 Microtubules power cilia and flagella 74Many eukaryotic cells possess flagella and/or cilia. These whiplike organelles push or pull the cell through its aqueous environment, or they may move surrounding liquid over the surface of the cell. Cilia and eukaryotic (but not prokaryotic*) flagella are both assembled from specialized microtubules and have identical internal structures, but they differ in their relative lengths and their patterns of beating: Flagella are longer than cilia and are usually found singly or in pairs. Waves of bending propagate from one end of a flagellum to the other in snakelike undulation. Cilia are shorter than flagella and are usually present in great numbers. They beat stiffly in one direction and recover flexibly in the other direction (like a swimmer's arm), so that the recovery stroke does not undo the work of the power stroke. Observed by electron microscopy in cross section, a typical cilium or eukaryotic flagellum is surrounded by the plasma membrane and contains a "9 + 2" array of microtubules. Nine fused pairs of microtubules-called doublets-form an outer cylinder, and one pair of unfused microtubules runs up the center. A spoke radiates from one microtuble of each pair and connects the doublet to the center of the structure. *Some prokaryotes have flagella, as we saw earlier, but prokaryotic flagella lack microtubules and dynein. The flagella of prokaryotes are neither structurally nor evolutionarily related to those of eukaryotes. The prokaryotic flagellum is assembled from a protein called flagellin, and it has a much simpler structure and a smaller diameter than a single eukaryotic microtubule. And whereas eukaryotic flagella beat in a wavelike motion, prokaryotic flagella rotate. 
In the cytoplasm at the base of every eukaryotic flagellum or cilium is an organelle called a basal body. The nine microtubule doublets extend into the basal body. In the basal body, each doublet is accompanied by another microtubule, making nine sets of three microtubules. The central, unfused microtubules do not extend into the basal body. The microtuble doublets of  cilia and flagella are linked by proteins. The motion of cilia and flagella results from the sliding of the microtubules past each other, driven by a motor protein called dynein, which can undergo changes in its shape driven by energy from ATP. Dynein molecules attached to one microtubule bind to a neighboring microtubule. As the dynein molecules change shape, they move the microtubule past its neighbor. Blocking the motor action of dynein is the idea behind a new class of spermicides used for contraception: Because these spermicides inhibit dynein, the sperm cannot swim toward the egg, and fertilization cannot occur. Dynein and another motor protein, kinesin, are responsible for carrying protein-laden vesicles from one part of the cell to another. Recall that microtubules have a + end and a - end. Dynein binds to a microtubule and moves attached vesicles and other organelles toward the - end, while kinesin moves them toward the + end. Centrioles are almost identical to basal bodies. Centrioles are found in all eukaryotes except the flowering plants, pine trees and their relatives, and some protists. Under the light microscope, a centriole looks like a small, featureless particle, but the electron microscope reveals that it is made up of a precise bundle of microtubules, arranged as nine sets of three fused microtubules each. Centrioles lie in the microtubule organizing center in cells that are about to undergo division. As you will see in Chapter 9, they are involved in the formation of the mitotic spindle, to which the chromosomes attach.4.8 Extracellular Structures 76Although the plasma membrane is the functional barrier between the inside and outside of a cell, many structures outside the plasma membrane are produced by cells, secreted to the outside, and play essential roles in protecting, supporting, or attaching cells. These structures are said to be extracellular because they are outside the plasma membrane. The peptidoglycan cell wall of bacteria is such an extracellular structure. In eukaryotes, other extracellular structures play the same roles: in plants, the cellulose cell wall, and in multicellular animals, the extracellular matrix found between cells. Bothof these structures are made up of a prominent fibrous macromolecule embedded in a jellylike medium.4.8.1 The plant cell wall consists largely of cellulose 76The cell wall of plant cells is a semirigid structure outside the plasma membrane. It consists of cellulose fibers embedded in other complex polysaccharides and proteins. The cell wall has two major roles in plants: It provides support for the cell and limits its volume by remaining rigid. It acts as a barrier to infections by fungi and other organisms that can cause plant diseases. Because of their thick cell walls, plant cells viewed under a light microscope appear to be entirely isolated from each other. But electron microscopy reveals that this is not the case. The cytoplasm of adjacent plant cells is connected by numerous plasma membrane-lined channels, called plasmodesmata, that are about 20 to 40 nm in diameter and extend through the walls of adjoining cells. These connections permit the diffusion of water, ions, small molecules, and RNA and proteins between connected cells. Such diffusion ensures that the cells of a plant have uniform concentrations of these substances.4.8.2 Multicellular animals have elaborate extracellular matrices 76The cells of multicellular animals lack the semirigid cell wall that is characteristic of plant cells, but many animal cells are surrounded by, or are in contact with, an extracellular matrix. This matrix is composed of fibrous proteins such as collagen (the most abundant protein in mammals) and glycoproteins. These proteins, as well as other substances particular to certain body tissues, are secreted by cells that are present in or near the matrix. In the human body, some tissues, such as those in the brain, have very little extracellular matrix; other tissues, such as bone and cartilage, have large amounts of extracellular matrix. The functions of the extracellular matrix are many: It holds cells together in tissues. It contributes to the physical properties of cartilage, skin, and other tissues. It helps filter materials passing between different tissues. It helps orient cell movements during embryonic development and during tissue repair. It plays a role in chemical signaling from one cell to another. The cells embedded in bone and cartilage, for example, secrete and maintain the extracellular material that makes up these structures. Bone cells are embedded in an extracellular matrix that consists primarily of collagen and calcium phosphate. This matrix gives bone its familiar rigidity. Epithelial cells, which line body cavities, lie together as a sheet spread over a basal lamina, or basement membrane, a form of extracellular matrix. Some extracellular matrices are made up, in part, of an enormous proteoglycan. A single molecule of this proteoglycan consists of many hundreds of polysaccharides covalently attached to about a hundred proteins, all of which are attached to one enormous polysaccharide. The molecular weight of this proteoglycan can exceed 100 million; the molecule takes up as much space as an entire prokaryotic cell.5 Cellular Membranes"No sweat" may describe your reaction to a course with a light workload. But it certainly does not apply to a professional athlete, or to anyone engaging on vigorous activity. The harder we work physically, the hotter we get, and soon we start to sweat. Sweating is a way to reduce body heat by using the heat to evaporate water. At peak activity, we can lose as much as 2 liters of water in an hour. The sweat glands lie just below the surface of the skin. They are essentially tubes bathed in extracellular fluid. When stimulated by physical activity or other signals, these tubes fill with water and dissolved solutes. To get from the extracellular fluid into the tubes, water must pass into and through the cells that line the tube. A hallmark of living cells is their ability to regulate what enters and leaves their cytoplasm. This is a function of the plasma membrane, which is composed of a hydrophobic lipid bilayer with associated proteins. When a person engages in normal activities, the membranes of the cells lining their sweat glands do not allow much water to enter or leave. But when the same person exercises, special pore proteins in the membrane, called aquaporins, open and allow water from the extracellular fluid to pass through the cells into a tube that leads to the surface of the skin. Membranes are not simply insulators and boundaries between cells and their environment, or between organelles and the cytosol. They are dynamic structures whose components move, change, and perform vital physiological roles as they allow cells to interact with other cells and molecules in the environment. We describe the structural aspects of these interactions here. Membranes also regulate ionic and molecular traffic into and out of the cell. This selective permeability, which we describe in this chapter, is an important characteristic of life. Later, we will see it in action is such diverse situations as the transduction of light energy into chemical energy in the chloroplast and the retention of water and ions in the mammalian kidney.5.1 Membrane Composition and Structure 79The chemical makeup, physical organization, and functioning of a biological membrane depend on three classes of biochemical compounds: lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates. The lipids establish the physical integrity of the membrane and create an effective barrier to the rapid passage of hydrophilic materials such as water and ions. In addition, the phospholipid bilayer serves as a lipid "lake" in which a variety of proteins "float." This general design is known as the fluid mosaic model of the membrane. Membrane proteins embedded in the phospholipid bilayer have a number of functions, including moving materials through the membrane and receiving chemical signals from the cell's external environment. Like some proteins, carbohydrates-the third class of compounds important in membranes-are crucial in recognizing specific molecules. The carbohydrates attach either to lipid or to protein molecules on the outside of the plasma membrane, where they protrude into the environment, away from the cell.5.1.1 Lipids constitute the bulk of a membrane 79Nearly all of the lipids in biological membranes are phospholipids. Recall from Chapter 2 that some compounds are hydrophilic ("water-loving") and others are hydrophobic ("water-hating"). Phospholipids are both: They have both hydrophilic regions and hydrophobic regions. The long, nonpolar fatty acid "tails" of a phospholipid molecule are hydrophobic and associate easily with other nonpolar materials, but they do not dissolve in water or associate with hydrophilic substances. The phosphorus-containing "head" of the phospholipid is electrically charged and hence very hydrophilic. As a consequence of these properties, one way in which phospholipids can coexist with water is to form a double layer, with the fatty acids of the two layers interacting with each other and the polar regions facing the outside aqueous environment. It is easy to make artificial membranes with the same bilayered arrangement in the laboratory. Both artificial and natural membranes form continuous sheets. Because of the tendency of the nonpolar fatty acids to associate with one another and exclude water, small holes or rips in a membrane seal themselves spontaneously. This property helps membranes fuse during vesicle fusion, phagocytosis, and related processes.The phospholipid bilayer stabilizes the entire membrane structure. At the same time, the fatty acids of the phospholipids make the hydrophobic interior of the membrane somewhat fluid-about as fluid as lightweight machine oil. This fluidity permits some molecules to move laterally within the plane of the membrane. A given phospholipid molecule in the plasma membrane may travel from one end of the cell to the other in a little more than a second. On the other hand, seldom does a phospholipid molecule in one half of the bilayer flip over to the other side and trade places with another phospholipid molecule. For such a swap to happen, the polar part of each molecule would have to move through the hydrophobic interior of the membrane. Since phospholipid flip-flops are rare, the inner and outer halves of the bilayer may be quite different in the kinds of phospholipids present. All biological membranes have a similar structure, but membranes from different cells or organelles may differ greatly in their lipid composition. For example, 25% of the lipid in some membranes is cholesterol (see Chapter 3), but other membranes have no cholesterol at all. When present, cholesterol is important to membrane integrity; most cholesterol in membranes is not hazardous to your health. A molecule of cholesterol is commonly situated next to an unsaturated fatty acid, and the polar hydroxyl end of the cholesterol extends into the surrounding aqueous layer. Cholesterol may either increase or decrease membrane fluidity, depending on other factors, such as fatty acid composition. Shorter fatty acid chains make for a more fluid membrane, as do unsaturated fatty acids. Adequate membrane fluidity is essential for many membrane functions. Since molecules move more slowly and fluidity decreases at reduced temperatures, membrane functions may decline in organisms that cannot keep their bodies warm. To address this problem, some organisms simply change the lipid compositions of their membranes, replacing saturated with unsaturated fatty acids and using fatty acids with shorter tails. Such changes play a part in the survival of plants and hibernating animals and bacteria during the winter.5.1.2 Membrane proteins are asymmetrically distributed 81All biological membranes contain proteins. Typically, plasma membranes have 1 protein molecule for every 25 phospholipid molecules. This ratio varies, depending on membrane function. In the inner membrane of the mitochondrion, which is specialized for energy processing, there is 1 protein for every 15 lipids; myelin, which encloses nerve cells  and uses the properties of lipids to act as an electrical insulator, has only 1 protein per 70 lipids. Many membrane proteins are embedded in, and/or extend across, the lipid bilayer. Like phospholipids, these proteins have polar and nonpolar regions. In the polar regions, amino acids with hydrophilic R groups (side chains) predominate, while the nonpolar regions have amino acids with hydrophobic R groups (see Table 3_2). Like the phospholipids, these proteins are positioned in the membrane so that the polar ends stick out into the aqueous environment and the nonpolar regions aggregate with one another (and with the nonpolar fatty acid tails of the lipids) away from water. A special preparation method for electron microscopy, freeze-fracturing, reveals membrane proteins embedded in the lipid bilayer. The bumps that can be seen protruding from the interior of a membrane are not observed in pure lipid bilayers. According to the fluid mosaic model, the proteins and lipids in a membrane are independent of each other, and interact only noncovalently. The polar ends of proteins can interact with polar ends of lipids, and the nonpolar regions of both molecules interact hydrophobically.There are two general types of membrane proteins: Integral membrane proteins have hydrophobic regions, and penetrate the phospholipid bilayer. Many of these proteins have long hydrophobic ?-helical regions that span the hydrophobic core of the bilayer. Their hydrophilic ends protrude into the aqueous environments on either side of the membrane. Peripheral membrane proteins lack hydrophobic regions, and are not embedded in the bilayer. Instead, they have polar or charged regions that interact with similar regions on exposed parts of the integral membrane proteins or phospholipid molecules. Some membrane proteins are covalently attached to fatty acids or other lipid groups. These proteins can be classified as a special type of integral protein, as their hydrophobic lipid component allows them to insert themselves into the lipid bilayer. Like the lipids, many membrane proteins move relatively freely within the phospholipid bilayer. Experiments using the technique of cell fusion illustrate this migration dramatically.When two cells are fused, a single continuous membrane forms and surrounds both cells, and some proteins from each cell distribute themselves uniformly around this membrane. Although many proteins are mobile in the membrane, some are not free to migrate but appear to be "anchored" by components of the cytoskeleton. This anchoring can result in a segregation of different proteins, resulting in functional specialization to different regions on the cell surface. For example, in certain muscle cells, the plasma membrane protein that serves as a receptor for the chemical signal from nerve cells is normally found only at the site where a nerve cell meets the muscle cell. None of this protein is found elsewhere on the surface of the muscle cell. Proteins are asymmetrically distributed on the inner and outer surfaces of a membrane. Transmembrane proteins show different "faces" on the two membrane surfaces. Such proteins have certain specific domains (or regions) of their primary structure on the outer side of the membrane, other domains within the membrane, and still other domains on the inner side of the membrane. Peripheral membrane proteins are localized on one side of the membrane or the other, but not both. This arrangement gives the two surfaces of the membrane different properties. As we will see when we discuss active transport, these differences have great functional significance.5.1.3 Membrane carbohydrates are recognition sites 82In addition to lipids and proteins, all plasma membranes and some internal cytoplasmic membranes contain significant amounts of carbohydrates. The carbohydrates are located on the outer surface of the membrane and serve as recognition sites for other cells and molecules.Membrane-associated carbohydrates may be covalently bound to lipids or to proteins. A carbohydrate bound to a lipid forms a glycolipid. The carbohydrate units of glycolipids often extend to the outside of the membrane, where they serve as recognition signals for interactions between cells. For example, the carbohydrate of some glycolipids changes when a cell becomes cancerous. This change may allow white blood cells to target the cancer cells for destruction. Most of the carbohydrate in membranes is covalently bound to proteins, forming glycoproteins. The bound carbohydrates are oligosaccharide chains, usually not exceeding 15 monosaccharide units in length. The chains are added to membrane proteins inside the endoplasmic reticulum and are modified in the Golgi apparatus. Glycoproteins enable a cell to be recognized by other cells and proteins. An "alphabet" of monosaccharides can be used to generate a diversity of messages. Recall from Chapter 3 that sugar molecules can be formed from 3-7 carbons attached at different sites to one another, forming linear or branched oligosaccharides with many different three-dimensional shapes. An oligosaccharide of a specific shape from one cell can bind to a mirror-image shape on an adjacent cell. This binding forms the basis of cell-to-cell adhesion.5.2 Cell Adhesion 82A living sponge is a multicellular marine animal with a simple body plan (see Chapter 31). The cells of the sponge are stuck together, but they can be disaggregated mechanically by passing the animal several times through a fine wire screen. What was an animal is now hundreds of individual of cells, suspended in seawater. Remarkably, if the cell suspension is shaken for a few hours, the cells reaggregate into a sponge! If two different species of sponge are disaggregated together, the cells of each species reaggregate into that species only. Such tissue-specific and species-specific cell adhesions are essential in the formation and maintenance of tissues and organisms. Think of the skin in your arm: What keeps its cells together and separates the skin from the underlying bones? You will see many examples of specific cell adhesion throughout this book; here, we describe its general principles.5.2.1 Cell adhesion involves recognition proteins 83The factor responsible for cell-cell recognition and adhesion in sponges was the first such molecule to be identified and purified. It is a huge membrane glycoprotein (80% sugar), partly embedded in the plasma membrane, with the recognition part sticking out and exposed to the environment (and to other sponge cells). Since then, many such recognition proteins have been purified. As we saw in Chapter 3, a macromolecule such as a protein has not only a specific shape, but also specific chemical groups. Both features allow binding to other specific molecules. In most cases, the binding of cells in a tissue is homotypic; that is, the same molecule sticks out of both cells, and the exposed surfaces bind to each other. But heterotypic binding (of cells with different proteins) also can occur. For example, when the mammalian sperm meets the egg, different proteins on the two types of cells have complementary binding surfaces. Plant cells also have recognition proteins. Some single-celled plants form similar-appearing reproductive cells (analogous to male and female) that have flagella to propel them toward each other. Male and female cells can recognize each other by heterotypic proteins on their flagella. In the majority of plant cells, the plasma membrane is covered with a thick cell wall, and this, too, has adhesion proteins that allow cells to bind to one another. Cell adhesion proteins from many multicellular organisms have been characterized. Some of them do not just bind the two cells together, but initiate the formation of specialized cell junctions. 5.3 Specialized Cell Junctions 84In a complex multicellular organism, cell-cell recognition proteins allow specific kinds of cells to adhere to each other. Often, both cells contribute material to additional membrane structures that "cement" their relationship. These specialized structures, called cell junctions, are most evident in electron micrographs of epithelial tissues, which are layers of cells that line body cavities or cover body surfaces. We will examine three types of cell surface junctions that enable cells to make direct physical contact and link with one another: tight junctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions5.3.1 Tight junctions seal tissues and prevent leaks 85Tight junctions are specialized structures at the plasma membrane that link adjacent epithelial cells. They result from the mutual binding of strands of specific membrane proteins that form a series of joints encircling the epithelial cells. They are found in the region surrounding the lumen (cavity) of organs such as the intestine. Tight junctions have two functions: They prevent substances from moving through the intercellular space. Thus, any substances entering the body from the lumen must pass through the epithelial cells. They restrict the migration of membrane proteins and phospholipids from one region of the cell to another. Thus, the proteins and phospholipids in the region facing the lumen (apical) can be different from those in the regions facing the sides and bottom of the cell (basolateral). By forcing materials to enter some cells, and by allowing different ends of cells to have different membrane proteins with different functions, tight junctions help ensure the directional movement of materials into the body.5.3.2 Desmosomes hold cells together 85Desmosomes are specialized structures associated with the plasma membrane at certain sites in epithelial tissues. They hold adjacent cells firmly together, acting like spot welds or rivets. Each desmosome consists of a dense plaque on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane. This plaque is attached to fibers in the cytoplasm and special cell adhesion proteins in the plasma membrane. These proteins stretch from the plaque through the plasma membrane of one cell, across the intercellular space, and through the plasma membrane of the adjacent cell, where they bind to the plaque proteins in that cell. The cytoplasmic fibers of a desmosome, which are intermediate filaments of the cytoskeleton, are made of a protein called keratin. They stretch from one cytoplasmic plaque across the cell to connect with another plaque on the other side of the cell. Anchored thus on both sides of the cell, these extremely strong keratin fibers provide great mechanical stability to epithelial tissues, which often receive rough wear in protecting the organism's body surface integrity. Gap junctions are a means of communication. Whereas tight junctions and desmosomes have mechanical roles, gap junctions facilitate communication between cells. Each gap junction is made up of specialized protein channels, called connexons, that span the plasma membranes of two adjacent cells and the intercellular space between them 7c). We will describe their role in more detail, as well as that of plasmodesmata, which perform a similar role in plants, when we discuss cell communication in Chapter 15. 5.4 Passive Processes of Membrane Transport 85We have examined membrane structure and how it is used to perform one membrane function: the binding of one cell to another. Now we turn to the second major membrane function, selective permeability: the ability to allow some substances, but not others, to pass through the plasma membrane and enter or leave the cell. There are two fundamentally different processes by which substances cross biological membranes to enter and leave cells or organelles: passive processes and active processes. Passive processes include the different types of diffusion: simple diffusion through the phospholipid bilayer, and facilitated diffusion through channel proteins or by means of carrier molecules. Active processes, on the other hand, require the input of energy. We'll discuss the active processes later in this chapter, after first focusing on the passive processes. Before considering diffusion as it works across a membrane, however, we must understand the basic principles of diffusion.5.4.1 The physical nature of diffusion 85Nothing in this world is ever absolutely at rest. Everything is in motion, though the motions may be very small. As the temperature of a solution rises, its molecules and ions move faster-they vibrate, rotate, and move from place to place more quickly. An important consequence of this random jiggling is that all the components of a solution tend eventually to become evenly distributed throughout the system. For example, if a drop of ink is allowed to fall into a container of water, the pigment molecules of the ink are initially very concentrated. Without human intervention such as stirring, the pigment molecules of the ink move about at random, spreading slowly through the water until eventually the concentration of pigment-and thus the intensity of color-is exactly the same in every drop of liquid in the container. A solution in which the particles are uniformly distributed is said to be at equilibrium, because there will be no future net change in concentration. Diffusion is the process of random movement toward a state of equilibrium. Although the motion of each individual particle is absolutely random, in diffusion the net movement of particles is directional until equilibrium is reached. Diffusion is thus net movement from regions of greater concentration to regions of lesser concentration.In a complex solution (one with many different solutes), the diffusion of each substance is independent of that of the others. How fast a substance diffuses depends on four factors: (1) the diameter of the molecules or ions; (2) the temperature of the solution; (3) the electric charge, if any, of the diffusing material; and (4) the concentration gradient in the system. The concentration gradient is the change in concentration with distance in a given direction. The greater the concentration gradient, the more rapidly a substance diffuses. Within cells, or wherever distances are very short, solutes distribute themselves rapidly by diffusion. Small molecules and ions may move from one end of an organelle to another in a millisecond (10-3 s). On the other hand, the usefulness of diffusion as a transport mechanism declines drastically as distances become greater. In the absence of mechanical stirring, diffusion across more than a centimeter may take an hour or more, and diffusion across meters may take years! Diffusion would not be adequate to distribute materials over the length of the human body, but within our cells or across layers of one or two cells, diffusion is rapid enough to distribute small molecules and ions almost instantaneously.In a solution without barriers, all the solutes diffuse at rates determined by temperature, their physical properties, and the concentration gradient of each solute. If a biological membrane is introduced as a barrier, the movement of the different solutes can be affected by the properties of the membrane. The membrane is said to be permeable to solutes that can cross it more or less easily, but impermeable to substances that cannot move across it. Molecules to which the membrane is permeable diffuse from one compartment to the other until their concentrations are equal on both sides of the membrane. Molecules to which the membrane is impermeable remain in separate compartments, and their concentrations remain different on the two sides of the membrane. Equilibrium is reached when the concentrations of the diffusing substance are identical on both sides of the membrane. Individual molecules are still passing through the membrane when equilibrium is established, but equal numbers of molecules are moving in each direction, so there is no net change in concentration.5.4.2 Simple diffusion takes place through the membrane bilayer 86In simple diffusion, small molecules pass through the lipid bilayer of the membrane. The more lipid-soluble the molecule, the more rapidly it diffuses through the bilayer. This statement holds true over a wide range of molecular weights. Only water and the smallest of molecules seem to deviate from this rule, passing through bilayers much more rapidly than their lipid solubilities would predict. Charged and/or polar molecules such as amino acids, sugars, and ions do not pass readily through a membrane, for two reasons. First, cells are made up of, and exist in, water, and polar or charged substances form many hydrogen bonds with water, preventing their "escape" to the membrane. Second, the interior of the membrane is hydrophobic, and hydrophilic substances tend to be excluded from it. On the other hand, a molecule that is itself hydrophobic, and hence soluble in lipids, enters the membrane readily and is thus able to pass through it.5.4.3 Osmosis is the diffusion of water across membranes 86Water molecules are abundant enough and small enough that they move through membranes by a diffusion process called osmosis. This completely passive process uses no metabolic energy and can be understood in terms of the concentrations of solutions. Osmosis depends on the number of solute particles present-not the kind of particles. We will describe osmosis using red blood cells and plant cells as examples. Red blood cells are normally suspended in a fluid called plasma, which contains salts, proteins, and other solutes. If a drop of blood is examined under the light microscope, the red cells are seen to have their characteristic donut shape. If pure water is added to the drop of blood, the cells quickly swell and burst 9a). Similarly, if slightly wilted lettuce is put in pure water, it soon becomes crisp; by weighing it before and after, we can show that it has taken up water. If, on the other hand, red blood cells or crisp lettuce leaves are placed in a relatively concentrated solution of salt or sugar, the leaves become limp and the red blood cells pucker and shrink. From analyses of such observations, we know that the difference in solute concentrations is the principal factor that determines whether water will move from the surrounding environment into cells, or out of cells into the environment. Other things being equal, if two different solutions are separated by a membrane that allows water, but not solutes, to pass through, water molecules will move across the membrane toward the solution with a higher solute concentration. In other words, water will diffuse from a region of its higher concentration (lower concentration of solutes) to a region of its lower concentration (higher concentration of solutes). Three terms are used to compare the solute concentrations of two solutions separated by a membrane: Isotonic solutions have equal total solute concentrations; A hypertonic solution has a higher total solute concentration than the other solution with which it is being compared; A hypotonic solution has a lower total solute concentration than the other solution with which it is being compared.Water moves from a hypotonic solution across a membrane to a hypertonic solution.When we say that "water moves," bear in mind that we are referring to the net movement of water. Since it is so abundant, water is constantly moving across the plasma membrane into and out of cells. Whether the overall movement is greater in one direction or the other is what concerns us here. The concentration of solutes in the environment determines the direction of osmosis in all animal cells. A red blood cell takes up water from a solution that is hypotonic to the cell's contents. The cell bursts because its plasma membrane cannot withstand the swelling of the cell. The integrity of red blood cells (and other blood cells) is absolutely dependent on the maintenance of a constant solute concentration in the plasma in which they are suspended: The plasma must be isotonic with the cells if the cells are not to burst or shrink. In contrast to animal cells, the cells of plants, archaea, bacteria, fungi, and some protists have cell walls that limit the volume of the cells and keep them from bursting. Unlike the red blood cell, the wilted lettuce leaf becomes firm and crisp when placed in pure water. Cells with sturdy cell walls take up a limited amount of water and, in so doing, build up internal pressure against the cell wall that prevents further water from entering. This pressure within the cell, called turgor pressure, is the driving force for the enlargement of plant cells-it is a normal and essential component of plant development.5.4.4 Diffusion may be aided by channel proteins 87As we saw earlier, polar substances such as amino acids and sugars and charged substances such as ions do not diffuse across membranes. Instead, they cross the hydrophobic lipid barrier through protein-lined channels in a process called facilitated diffusion. Integral membrane proteins form these channels, which are lined with polar amino acids and water on the inside (to bind to the polar or charged substance and allow it to pass) and nonpolar amino acids on the outside (to allow the protein channel to insert itself into the lipid bilayer). The best-studied protein channels are the ion channels. As you will see, the movement of ions into and out of cells is important in many biological processes, ranging from the electrical activity of the nervous system to the opening of pores in leaves that allow gas exchange with the environment. Hundreds of these channels have been identified, and all show the basic structure of a water-lined pore that just fits the ion that moves through it. Ion channels are gated: they can be closed to ion passage, or open. A gated channel opens when something happens to change the shape of the protein. Depending on the channel, this stimulus can range from the binding of a chemical signal to an electrical charge caused by an imbalance of ions. Once the channel opens, millions of ions can rush through it per second. How fast this happens, and in which direction (into or out of the cell), depends on the concentration gradient of the ion between the cytoplasm and the exterior environment of the cell. For example, if  the concentration of potassium is much higher outside of the cell than inside, potassium will enter the cell through a  potassium channel by diffusion; if it is higher inside the cell, potassium will diffuse out of the cell. As we mentioned, water crosses the plasma membrane at a rate far in excess of expectations, given its polarity. One way that water can do this is by hydrating ions as they pass through ion channels. Up to 12 water molecules may coat an ion as it traverses a channel. Another way that water enters cells rapidly is through water channels called aquaporins. Membrane proteins that allow water to pass through them have been characterized in many cells, from the plant vacuole, where they are important in maintaining turgor, to the mammalian kidney, where they act in retaining water that would otherwise be lost through urine.5.4.5 Carrier proteins aid diffusion by binding substances 88Another kind of facilitated diffusion involves not just the opening of a channel, but the actual binding of the transported substance to a membrane protein. These proteins are called carriers, and, like channel proteins, they allow diffusion both into and out of the cell. They are used to transport polar molecules such as sugars and amino acids. Glucose, for example, is the major energy source for most mammalian cells, and those cells have a carrier protein called the glucose transporter that facilitates the uptake of glucose. Since glucose is rapidly altered as soon as it gets into a cell, there is almost always a strong concentration gradient favoring glucose entry, with a higher concentration outside the cell (in blood capillaries or the intestine) than inside. Transport by carrier proteins is different from simple diffusion. In both processes, the rate of movement depends on the concentration gradient across the membrane. However, in facilitated diffusion, a point is reached at which further increases in the concentration gradient are not accompanied by an increased rate of diffusion. At this point, the facilitated diffusion system is said to be saturated. Because there are only a limited number of carrier protein molecules per unit of membrane area, the rate of movement reaches a maximum when all the carrier molecules are fully loaded with solute molecules. In other words, when the differences in solute concentration across the membrane are sufficiently high, not enough carrier molecules are free at a given moment to handle all the solute molecules. 5.5 Active Transport 88In many biological situations, an ion or molecule must be moved across a membrane from a region of lower concentration to a region of higher concentration. In these cases, the substance cannot not rush into or out of cells by diffusion. The movement of a substance across a biological membrane  against a concentration gradient-called active transport-requires the expenditure of energy. The differences between diffusion and active transport are summarized in Table 5_1.5.5.1 Active transport is directional 89Three types of proteins are involved in active transport: Uniport transporters move a single solute in one direction. For example, a Ca2+-binding protein found in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum membranes of many cells actively transports this ion to regions of higher concentration either outside the cell or inside the ER. Symport transporters move two solutes in the same direction.For example, the uptake of amino acids from the intestine into the cells that line it requires the simultaneous binding of Na+ and amino acid to the same carrier protein. Antiport transporters move two solutes in opposite directions, one into the cell and the other out of the cell. For example, many cells have an "Na+-K+ pump" that moves Na+ out of the cell and K+ into it.5.5.2 Primary and secondary active transport rely on different energy sources89There are two basic types of active transport processes. The first, primary active transport, requires the direct participation of ATP. Energy released by the hydrolysis of ATP drives the movement of specific ions against a concentration gradient. For example, if we compare the concentrations of potassium ions (K+) and sodium ions (Na+) inside a nerve cell and in the fluid bathing the nerve, we can see that the K+ concentration is much higher inside the cell, whereas the Na+ concentration is much higher outside. Nevertheless, a protein in the nerve cells continues to pump Na+ out and K+ in, against these concentration gradients, ensuring that the gradients are maintained. This sodium-potassium pump is found in all animal cells and is an integral membrane glycoprotein. It breaks down a molecule of ATP to ADP and phosphate (Pi), and uses the energy released to bring two K+ ions into the cell and export three Na+ ions. The Na+-K+ pump is thus an antiport transport system. Only cations are transported directly by pumps in primary active transport. Other solutes are transported by secondary active transport. This form of active transport does not use ATP directly; rather, the transport of the solute is tightly coupled to an ion concentration gradient established by primary active transport. The movement of the solute against its concentration gradient is accomplished using energy "regained" by letting ions move across the membrane with their concentration gradient. For example, energy from ATP is used in primary active transport to establish concentration gradients of potassium and sodium ions; then the passive diffusion of some sodium ions in the opposite direction provides energy for the secondary active transport of the sugar glucose. Other secondary active transporters aid in the uptake of amino acids and other sugars, which are essential raw materials for cell maintenance and growth. Both types of coupled transport proteins-symports and antiports-are used for secondary active transport. 5.6 Endocytosis and Exocytosi 90Macromolecules such as proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleic acids are simply too large and too charged or polar to pass through membranes. This is a fortunate property. Think of the consequences if these molecules could diffuse out of cells: A red blood cell would not retain its hemoglobin! On the other hand, cells must sometimes take up or secrete intact large molecules. As we saw in Chapter 4, this occurs by means of vesicles that either pinch off from the plasma membrane and enter the cell (endocytosis) or fuse with the plasma membrane and release their contents (exocytosis).5.6.1 Macromolecules and particles enter the cell by endocytosis 90Endocytosis is a general term for a group of processes that bring macromolecules, large particles, small molecules, and even small cells into the eukaryotic cell. There are three types of endocytosis: phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis. In all three, the plasma membrane invaginates (folds inward) around materials from the environment, forming a small pocket. The pocket deepens, forming a vesicle. This vesicle separates from the surface of the cell and migrates with its contents to the cell's interior. In phagocytosis, part of the plasma membrane engulfs fairly large particles or even entire cells. Phagocytosis is used as a cellular feeding process by unicellular protists and by some white blood cells that defend the body against foreign cells and substances. The food vacuole or phagosome formed usually fuses with a lysosome, and its contents are digested. In pinocytosis ("cellular drinking"), vesicles also form. However, these vesicles are smaller, and the process operates to bring in small dissolved substances or fluids. It is relatively nonspecific as to what it brings into the cell. For example, pinocytosis goes on constantly in the endothelium, the single layer of cells that separates a tiny blood capillary from its surrounding tissue, and is a way for the cells to rapidly acquire the fluids of the blood. In receptor-mediated endocytosis, specific reactions at the cell surface trigger the uptake of specific materials. Let's take a closer look at this process.5.6.2 Receptor-mediated endocytosis is highly specific 91Receptor-mediated endocytosis in used by animal cells to capture specific macromolecules from the cell's environment. The uptake process is similar to nonspecific endocytosis, as already described. However, in receptor-mediated endocytosis, receptor proteins at particular sites on the outer surface of the plasma membrane bind to specific substances in the environment outside the cell. These sites are called coated pits because they form a slight depression in the plasma membrane whose cytoplasmic surface is coated by fibrous proteins, such as clathrin.When a receptor protein binds to its specific macromolecule outside the cell, its coated pit invaginates  and forms a coated vesicle around the bound macromolecule. Strengthened and stabilized by clathrin molecules, this vesicle carries the macromolecule into the cell. Once inside, the vesicle loses its clathrin coat and may fuse with a lysosome, where the engulfed material is processed and released into the cytoplasm. Because of its specificity for particular macromolecules, receptor-mediated endocytosis is a rapid and efficient method of taking up what may be minor constituents of the cell's environment. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is the method by which cholesterol is taken up by most mammalian cells. Water-insoluble cholesterol is synthesized in the liver and transported in the blood attached to a protein, forming a lipoprotein called low-density lipoprotein, or LDL. The uptake of cholesterol begins with the binding of LDL to specific receptor proteins in coated pits. After being engulfed by endocytosis, the LDL particle is freed from the receptors. The receptors segregate to a region of the vesicle that buds off to form a new vesicle, which is recycled to the plasma membrane. The freed LDL particle remains in the original vesicle, which fuses with a lysosome in which the LDL is digested and the cholesterol made available for cell use. Persons with the inherited disease hypercholesterolemia (-emia, "blood") have dangerously high levels of cholesterol in their blood because of a deficient receptor for LDL.5.6.3 Exocytosis moves materials out of the cell 91Exocytosis is the process by which materials packaged in vesicles are secreted from a cell when the vesicle membrane fuses with the plasma membrane. The initial event in this process is the binding of a membrane protein protruding from the cytoplasmic side of the vesicle with a membrane protein on the cytoplasmic side of the target site on the plasma membrane. The phospholipid regions of the two membranes merge, and an opening to the outside of the cell develops. The contents of the vesicle are released to the environment, and the vesicle membrane is smoothly incorporated into the plasma membrane. In Chapter 4, we encountered exocytosis as the last step in the processing of material engulfed by phagocytosis: the secretion of indigestible materials to the environment. Exocytosis is also important in the secretion of many different substances, including digestive enzymes from the pancreas, neurotransmitters from nerve cells, and materials for the construction of the plant cell wall.5.7 Membranes Are Not Simply Barriers 92We have discussed several functions of membranes-the compartmentalization of cells, the regulation of traffic between compartments, and the movement of materials into and out of cells-but there are more. In Chapter 4, we described how the membrane of the rough endoplasmic reticulum serves as a site for ribosome attachment. Newly formed proteins are passed from the ribosomes through the membrane and into the interior of the ER for modification and delivery to other parts of the cell. On the other hand, the membranes of nerve cells, muscle cells, some eggs, and other cells are electrically excitable. In nerve cells, the plasma membrane is the conductor of the nerve impulse from one end of the cell to the other. Numerous other biological activities and properties discussed in the chapters to follow are associated with membranes. We review three of these here.As we have seen, the plasma membranes at cell surfaces and the membranes within cells may have protruding integral membrane proteins or attached carbohydrates that can bind to specific substances in the environment. The binding of a specific substance can serve as a signal to initiate, modify, or turn off a cell function. In this type of information processing, specificity in binding is essential. We have already seen the role of a specific receptor protein in the endocytosis of LDL and its cargo of cholesterol. Another example is the binding of a hormone, such as insulin, to specific receptors on a target cell, such as a liver cell, to elicit a response-in this case, the uptake of glucose. There are many other examples, which we will discuss in Chapter 15. In a variety of cells, the membranes of organelles are specialized for processing energy. For example, the inner mitochondrial membrane helps convert the energy of fuel molecules to the energy in ATP, and the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts participate in the conversion of light energy to the energy of chemical bonds. The two characteristics of membranes that enable them to participate in these processes are their structural organization and their separation of electric charges. Many processes in cells depend on a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions in which the products of one reaction serve as the reactants for the next. For such a reaction to occur, all the necessary molecules must come together. In a solution, the reactants and enzymes are all randomly distributed, and collisions among them are random. For this reason, a complete series of chemical reactions in solution may occur very slowly. However, if the different enzymes are bound to a membrane in sequential order, the product of one reaction can be released close to the enzyme for the next reaction. With such an "assembly line," reactions proceed more rapidly and efficiently. 5.8 Membranes Are Dynamic 92As we have seen in this chapter, membranes participate in numerous physiological and biochemical processes. Membranes are dynamic in another sense as well: They are constantly forming, transforming from one type to another, fusing with one another, and breaking down.In eukaryotes, phospholipids are synthesized on the surface of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and rapidly distributed to membranes throughout the cell as vesicles form from the ER, move away, and fuse with other organelles. Membrane proteins are inserted into the rough endoplasmic reticulum as they form on ribosomes. Functioning membranes also move about within eukaryotic cells. For example, portions of the rough ER bud away from the ER and join the cis faces of the Golgi apparatus (see Chapter 4). Rapidly-often in less than an hour-these segments of membrane find themselves in the trans regions of the Golgi, from which they bud away to join the plasma membrane. During this journey, changes in the membrane's proteins and phospholipids occur. Membrane from vesicles is constantly merging with the plasma membrane by exocytosis, but this process is largely balanced by the removal of membrane in endocytosis. This removal affords a recovery path by which internal membranes are replenished. In sum, there is a steady flux of membranes, as well as membrane components, in cells.Because all membranes appear similar under the electron microscope, and because they interconvert readily, we might expect all subcellular membranes to be chemically identical. As you already know, that is not the case, for there are major chemical differences among the membranes of even a single cell. Membranes are changed chemically when they form parts of certain organelles. In the Golgi apparatus, for example, the membranes of the cis face closely resemble those of the endoplasmic reticulum in chemical composition, but the trans-face membranes are more similar in composition to the plasma membrane. As a vesicle is formed, the mix of proteins and lipids in its membrane is selected, just as its internal contents are selected, to correspond with the vesicle's destination, or target membrane. Ceaselessly moving, functioning, changing their composition and roles, biological membranes are central to life.6 Energy, Enzymes, and MetabolismThe 5-year-old boy presented Boston surgeon Joseph Upton with a problem. Dr. Upton had sewn the boy's ear back on after a dog had bitten it off, but after 4 days, blood flow to and from the ear was blocked. If blood flow was not restored quickly, the reattachment would fail. To open up the blood vessels, Dr. Upton tried an old technique: He applied 24 leeches to the wound. The leeches used their sucking mouthparts to attach to the boy's ear and drank his blood. In the process, they released a molecule called hirudin (after the scientific name of the leech, Hirudo medicinalis) into the boy's blood. A potent anti-clotting agent, the hirudin acted slowly but consistently over 24 hours to clear the obstructed vessels, and the boy's ear was saved. The medical use of leeches to prevent blood clotting goes back thousands of years. One of the most powerful anti-clotting agents known, hirudin is a small protein of 65 amino acids that folds into a specific shape that allows it to bind tightly to thrombin, a protein present in human blood. In the absence of hirudin, thrombin has a three-dimensional structure that allows it to bind to fibrinogen (yet another blood plasma protein). When this binding occurs, a peptide bond between two of the amino acids in fibrinogen is broken, forming fibrin-the protein that forms blood clots. If hirudin binds to thrombin, thrombin cannot act on fibrinogen, and blood clots do not form.In chemical terms, thrombin is an enzyme, or biological catalyst, for this reaction. The hydrolysis of peptide bonds to form fibrin would happen whether thrombin was there or not; it's just that it would happen much more slowly, certainly too slowly to have any benefit in the lifetime of the organism! Thousands of such reactions go on all the time in every organism, each reaction catalyzed by a specific protein with a particular three-dimensional structure. Taken together, these reactions make up metabolism, which is the sum total of all of the chemical conversions in a cell. Many metabolic reactions can be classified as either as (10 building up complexity in the cell, using up energy to do so; or (2) breaking down complex substances into simpler ones, releasing energy in the process. This chapter is concerned with energy and enzymes. Without them, neither we nor any other organism would be able to function. Indeed, when an enzyme is inactivated, either by the binding of an inhibitor such as hirudin that keeps the enzyme from binding to its target or by some error leading to an alteration in its three-dimensional structure, its function is destroyed. This can have dire consequences: What if we had hirudin in our blood all the time? Before considering how enzymes perform their molecular wizardry, let us consider the general principles of energy in biological systems. 6.1 Energy and Energy Conversions 95Physicists define energy as the capacity to do work, which occurs when a force operates on  an object over a distance. In biochemistry, energy represents the capacity for change. All living things must obtain energy from the environment-no cell manufactures energy. Indeed, one of the fundamental physical laws is that energy can neither be created not destroyed. However, energy can be transformed from one kind into another. Energy transformations are linked to the chemical transformations that occur in cells. Metabolism is the total chemical activity of a living organism; at any instant, metabolism consists of thousands of individual chemical reactions.6.1.1 Energy changes are related to changes in matter 96Energy comes in many forms, such as chemical energy, light energy, and mechanical energy. But all forms of energy can be considered as one of into two basic types: Kinetic energy is the energy of movement. This type of energy does work that alters the state or mtion of matter. It can exist in the form of heat, light, electric, and mechanical energy, among others. Potential energy is the energy of state or position-that is, stored energy. It can be stored in chemical bonds, as a concentration gradient, and as electric potential, among other ways. Water stored behind a dam has potential energy. When the water is released from the dam, some of this potential energy is converted into kinetic energy 1). Likewise, fatty acids, with their many C-C and C-H bonds, store chemical energy, which can be released to do biochemical work. In Chapter 5, we saw an example of the potential energy of a concentration gradient in secondary active transport, in which the gradient of one substance (Na+) across a plasma membrane powers the transport of another (glucose). In all cells of all organisms, two types of metabolic reactions occur: Anabolic reactions (anabolism) link together simple molecules to form more complex molecules. The synthesis of a protein from amino acids is anabolic. Anabolic reactions store energy in the chemical bonds that are formed. Catabolic reactions (catabolism) break down complex molecules into simpler ones and release stored energy. The energy needed to form the peptide bonds that link amino acids together into proteins comes from catabolism. Catabolic and anabolic reactions are often linked. The energy released in catabolic reactions is used to do biological work and drive anabolic reactions. Cellular activities such as growth, motion, and active transport of ions across a membrane all require energy, and none of them would proceed without a source of energy. In the discussion that follows, you will discover the physical laws that govern all energy transformations, identify the energy available to do work, and consider the direction of energy flow.6.1.2 The first law: Energy is neither created nor destroyed 97Energy can be converted from one form to another. For example, by striking a match, you convert potential chemical energy to light and heat. In any conversion of energy from one form to another (chemical to light, mechanical to electric), energy is neither created nor destroyed. This is the first law of thermodynamics. The first law applies to the universe as a whole or to any closed system within the universe. By "system" we mean any part of the universe containing specified matter and energy. A closed system is one that is not exchanging energy with its surroundings. For example, a thermos bottle does not gain or lose heat, and so the material inside it is a closed system. Open systems, such as living cells, exchange matter and energy with their surroundings. Does this mean that cells disobey the first law, or that the first law does not apply to living organisms? Not at all. It means that an open system is merely one part of a larger closed system and receives energy from other parts of that larger system. The first law tells us that in any interconversion of the forms of energy, the total energy before and after the conversion is the same. As you will see in the next two chapters, potential energy in the chemical bonds of carbohydrates and lipids can be converted to potential energy in ATP. This energy can then be used to produce potential energy in the concentration gradients established by active transport, which can be converted to kinetic energy and used to do mechanical work, such as muscle contraction.6.1.3 The second law: Not all energy can be used, and disorder tends to increase 97The second law of thermodynamics states that, although energy cannot be created or destroyed, when energy is converted from one form to another, some of the energy becomes unavailable to do work 3b). In other words, no physical process or chemical reaction is 100 percent efficient, and not all the energy released can be converted to work. Some energy is lost to a form associated with disorder. The second law applies to all energy transformations, but we will focus here on chemical reactions in living systems. In any system, the total energy includes the usable energy that can do work and the unusable energy that is lost to disorder: total energy = usable energy + unusable energy. In biological systems, the total energy is called enthalpy (H). The usable energy that can do work is called free energy (G). Free energy is what cells require for all the chemical reactions of cell growth, cell division, and the maintenance of cell health. The unusable energy is represented by entropy (S), which is the disorder of the system, multiplied by the absolute temperature (T). Thus we can rewrite the word equation above more precisely as H = G + TS. Because we are interested in usable energy, we rearrange this expression: G = H - TS. Although we cannot measure G, H, or S absolutely, we can determine the change of each at a constant temperature. These energy changes are measured as calories (cal) or joules (J) (see Chapter 2). A change in a value is represented by the Greek letter delta (?), and it can be negative or positive. Therefore, the change in free energy (?G) of any reaction at constant temperature is defined in terms of the change in total energy (?H) and the change in entropy (?S): ?G = ?H - T?S. This equation tells us whether free energy is released or consumed by a chemical reaction. If ?G is negative (-?G), free energy is released. If ?G is positive (+?G), free energy is required (consumed). If the needed free energy is not available, the reaction does not occur. The sign and magnitude of ?G depend on the two factors on the right of the equation: ?H and T?S. In a chemical reaction, ?H is the total amount of energy added to the system (+?H) or released (-?H). In determining the free energy released, the sign of ?H is obviously important. But the  change in entropy must also be considered. Depending on the magnitude and sign of ?S, the entire term, T?S, may be negative or positive, large or small. In other words, in biological systems at constant temperature (no change in T), the magnitude and sign of ?G can depend a lot on changes in entropy.If a chemical reaction increases entropy, its products are more disordered or random. If there are more products than reactants, as in the hydrolysis of a protein to its amino acids, the products have considerable freedom to move around. The disorder and the entropy in a solution of amino acids will be large compared with that in the protein, in which peptide bonds and other forces prevent free movement. So in hydrolysis, the change in entropy (?S) will be positive. If there are fewer products, and they are more restrained in their movements than the reactants, ?S will be negative. For example, a large protein linked by peptide bonds is less free in its movements than a solution of the thousands of amino acids from which it was synthesized. The second law of thermodynamics also predicts that, as a result of energy conversions, disorder tends to increase in the universe or a closed system. Chemical changes, physical changes, and biological processes all tend to increase entropy and therefore tend toward disorder, or randomness 3c). This tendency for disorder to increase gives a directionality to physical processes and chemical reactions. It explains why some reactions proceed in one direction rather than another. The constant thermonuclear reactions in the sun will eventually result in its "running down" (but you don't need to worry, since it won't happen for several billion years). The second law does not say that ordered systems cannot be formed inside a large, complex closed system. In a closed system such as our solar system, free energy can be used to create order in one part of the system. The entire Earth, or a single cell on Earth, is an open system that receives energy from its environment. In the case of Earth, the sun provides most of that energy. In a cell, the breakdown of complex molecules in food provides the energy to create order. For example, an input of free energy results in the formation of a protein from amino acids in a solution, and an input of free energy maintains the order in your cells and in your room. Some energy does enter and leave the solar system-we do see the light of stars, after all-but the solar system is very nearly closed. The universe itself is a perfectly closed system (perhaps the only perfectly closed system).6.1.4 Chemical reactions release or take up energy 99How are the laws of thermodynamics relevant to our understanding of the chemical reactions that occur in living things? Chemical reactions in cells are accompanied by changes in energy and changes in order. Anabolic reactions may make a single product, such as a protein (a highly ordered substance), out of many smaller amino acids (less ordered), and such reactions require or consume energy. Catabolic reactions reduce an organized substance, such as a glucose molecule, to smaller, more randomly distributed substances, such as carbon dioxide and water, and in the process give off energy. In other words, some reactions release free energy, and others take it up. The amount of energy released (-?G) or taken up (+?G) is related directly to the tendency of a reaction to run to completion (for all the reactants to form products). When a reaction goes more than halfway to completion without an input of energy, we say that it is a spontaneous reaction  Nonspontaneous reactions proceed only with the addition of free energy from the environment. Spontaneous reactions release free energy. A reaction that releases free energy is said to be exergonic and has a negative ?G. Nonspontaneous reactions require free energy from the environment. Such reactions are said to be endergonic and have a positive ?G. If a reaction runs spontaneously in one direction (from reactant A to product B, for example), then the reverse reaction (from B to A) requires a steady supply of energy to drive it: If A ? B is spontaneous and exergonic (-?G), then ? ? A is nonspontaneous and endergonic (+?G). So protein hydrolysis to amino acids is spontaneous and exergonic, while protein synthesis is nonspontaneous and endergonic. In principle, chemical reactions can run both forward and backward. For example, if compound A can be converted into compound B (A ? B), then B, in principle, can be converted into A (B ? A), although at given concentrations of A and B, only one of these directions will be favored. Think of the overall reaction as resulting from competition between forward and reverse reactions (A ??B). Increasing the concentration of the reactants (A) speeds up the forward reaction, and increasing the concentration of the products (B) favors the reverse reaction. At some concentration of A and B, the forward and reverse reactions take place at the same rate. At this point, no further net change in the system is observable, although individual molecules are still forming and breaking apart. This balance between forward and reverse reactions is known as chemical equilibrium.6.1.5 Chemical equilibrium and free energy are related 100Every chemical reaction proceeds to a certain extent, but not necessarily to completion. In other words, all the reactants present are not necessarily converted to products. Each reaction has a specific equilibrium point, and that equilibrium point is related to the free energy released by the reaction under specified conditions. To understand the principle of equilibrium, consider the following example. Every living cell contains glucose 1-phosphate, which is converted in the cell to glucose 6-phosphate. Imagine that we start out with an aqueous solution of glucose 1-phosphate that has a concentration of 0.02 M. (M stands for molar concentration; see Chapter 2.) The solution is maintained under constant environmental conditions (25¡C and pH 7). As the reaction proceeds to equilibrium, the concentration of the product, glucose 6-phosphate, rises from 0 to 0.019 M, while the glucose 1-phosphate concentration falls to 0.001 M. The reaction proceeds until equilibrium is reached at these concentrations 6). From then on, the reverse reaction, from glucose 6-phosphate to glucose 1-phosphate, progresses at the same rate as the forward reaction.At equilibrium, then, this reaction has a product-to-reactant ratio of 19:1 (0.019/0.001), so the forward reaction has gone 95 percent of the way to completion ("to the right," as written). Therefore, the forward reaction is a spontaneous reaction. This result is obtained every time the experiment is run under the same conditions. The change in free energy (?G) for any reaction is related directly to its point of equilibrium. The further toward completion the point of equilibrium lies, the more free energy is given off. In an exergonic reaction, such as the conversion of glucose 1-phosphate to glucose 6-phosphate, ?G is a negative number (in this example, ?G = -1.7 kcal/mol, or -7.1 kJ/mol). A large, positive ?G for a reaction means that it proceeds hardly at all to the right (A ? B). But if the product is present, such a reaction runs backward, or "to the left" (A ? B), to near completion (nearly all B is converted to A). A ?G value near zero is characteristic of a readily reversible reaction: reactants and products have almost the same free energies. The principles of thermodynamics we have been discussing apply to all energy exchanges in the universe-no exceptions have ever been found. Thus these principles are very powerful and useful. Next, we'll apply them to reactions in cells that involve the biological energy currency, ATP. 6.2 ATP: Transferring Energy in Cells 100The previous chapters have mentioned adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, and its role in cells. All living cells rely on ATP for the capture, transfer, and storage of the free energy needed to do chemical work and maintain the cells. ATP operates as a kind of energy currency. That is, just as your professor teaches you, receives money for it, and then spends the money on food, some of the free energy released by certain exergonic reactions is captured in ATP, which can then release free energy to drive endergonic reactions. ATP is produced by cells in a number of ways, which we will describe in the next two chapters, and it is used in many ways. ATP is not an unusual molecule. In fact, it has another important use in the cell: it can be converted into a building block for DNA and RNA. But there are two things about it that make it especially useful to cells: It can be hydrolyzed, and it can donate a phosphate group to many different molecules.6.2.1 ATP hydrolysis releases energy 100An ATP molecule consists of the nitrogenous base adenine bonded to ribose (a sugar), which is attached to a sequence of three phosphate groups 8). The hydrolysis of ATP yields ADP (adenosine diphosphate) and an inorganic phosphate ion (abbreviated Pi, short for HPO42), as well as free energy: ATP + H2O ? ADP + Pi + free energy. Two important properties of this reaction are: It is exergonic, releasing free energy. The change in free energy (?G) is about -12 kcal/mol (-50 kJ/mol) at the temperature, pH, and substrate concentrations typical of living cells. The equilibrium for this reaction is far to the right-that is, toward ADP production. At equilibrium in the cell, there is 10 million times as much ADP as ATP. The "standard" ?G for ATP hydrolysis is -7.3 kcal/mol or -30 kJ/mol, but that value is valid only at pH 7 and with ATP, ADP, and phosphate present at concentrations of 1 M-concentrations that differ greatly from those found in cells. What characteristics of ATP account for the free energy released by the hydrolysis of its phosphates? Consider how phosphates are added to adenosine monophosphate-AMP-to make ADP. The phosphate on AMP is negatively charged; so is the free phosphate to be added. It takes a lot of free energy to overcome the tendencies of these phosphates to repel each other. The same thing happens with the addition of the third phosphate to ADP (adenosine diphosphate) to make ATP. Once again, the two negatively charged molecules repel each other unless a lot of energy is added. An analogy is the springs that suspend a car: To compress the springs, you need to lean on the car (input of energy), and the car bounces up (the energy is released) when the springs extend. Likewise, the energy required to make ATP  is released when it is hydrolyzed.6.2.2 ATP couples exergonic and endergonic reactions 101As we have just seen, the hydrolysis of ATP is exergonic and yields ADP, Pi, and free energy. The reverse reaction, the formation of ATP from ADP and Pi, is endergonic and consumes as much free energy as is released by the breakdown of ATP: ADP + Pi + free energy ? ATP + H2O. Many different enzyme-catalyzed exergonic reactions in the cell can provide the energy to convert ADP to ATP. In eukaryotes, the most important of these reactions is cellular respiration, in which energy is released from fuel molecules and trapped in ATP. The formation and hydrolysis of ATP constitute what might be called an "energy-coupling cycle" in which ATP shuttles energy from exergonic reactions to endergonic reactions. How does this ATP cycle trap and release energy? An exergonic reaction is coupled to the endergonic reaction that forms ATP from ADP and Pi. Coupling of exergonic and endergonic reactions is very common in biochemistry. When it forms, ATP captures free energy. ATP then diffuses to another site in the cell, where its hydrolysis releases free energy to drive an endergonic reaction. The formation of the amino acid glutamine has a positive ?G (is endergonic, nonspontaneous) and will not proceed without the input of free energy from ATP hydrolysis, which has a negative ?G (exergonic, spontaneous). The total ?G for the coupled reactions is negative (the two ?G's are added together). Hence the reactions proceed spontaneously when they are coupled, and glutamine is synthesized. Actually, the overall reaction proceeds in two steps and involves a phosphorylated intermediate that is common to both reactions: In the first reaction, ATP transfers a phosphate group to glutamate (glutamic acid), producing the higher-energy product glutamyl phosphate (the phosphorylated intermediate). In the second reaction, the hydrolysis of glutamyl phosphate provides sufficient free energy to drive the reaction with an ammonium ion (NH4+) to form glutamine. An active cell requires millions of molecules of ATP per second to drive its biochemical machinery. An ATP molecule is consumed within a minute following its formation, on average. At rest, an average person hydrolyzes and produces about 40 kg of ATP per day-as much as some people weigh! This means that each ATP molecule undergoes about 10,000 cycles of synthesis and hydrolysis every day. 6.3 Enzymes: Biological Catalysts 102When we know the change in free energy (?G) of a reaction, we know where the equilibrium point of the reaction lies: The more negative ?G is, the further the reaction proceeds toward completion. However, ?G tells us nothing about the rate of a reaction-the speed at which it moves toward equilibrium. As we will see, some exergonic reactions are very rapid; others are slower. Living cells cope with this variability by using biological catalysts to increase the rates of almost all chemical reactions. A catalyst is any substance that speeds up a chemical reaction without itself being used up. A catalyst does not cause a reaction to take place that would not take place eventually without it, but merely speeds up the rates of both forward and backward reactions, allowing equilibrium to be approached faster. Most biological catalysts are proteins called enzymes. Although we will focus here on proteins, you should know that certain RNA molecules, called ribozymes, are also catalytic. Indeed, in the evolution of life, catalytic RNA may have preceded catalytic proteins (see Chapter 25).In the discussion that follows, we will identify the energy barrier that controls the rate of reactions. Then we'll focus on the role of enzymes: how they interact with reactants, how they lower the activation energy barrier, and how they permit reactions to proceed faster. After exploring the nature and significance of enzyme specificity, we'll look at how enzymes contribute to the coupling of reactions.6.3.1 For a reaction to proceed, an energy barrier must be overcome 102An exergonic reaction may release a great deal of free energy, but the reaction may take place very slowly. Some reactions are slow because there is an energy barrier between reactants and products. Think about a butane lighter. The burning of the butane gas (butane + O2 ? CO2 + H2O) is obviously exergonic-heat and light are released. Once started, the reaction goes to completion: all of the butane reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water vapor. Because burning butane liberates so much energy, you might expect this reaction to proceed rapidly whenever butane is exposed to oxygen. But this does not happen. Simply mixing butane with air produces no reaction. Butane will start burning only if a spark-an input of energy-is provided. (In the butane lighter, this is supplied by friction.) The need for this spark to start the reaction shows that there is an energy barrier between the reactants and the products. In general, exergonic reactions proceed only after they are pushed over the energy barrier by a small amount of added energy. The energy barrier thus represents the amount of energy needed to start the reaction. This amount is called the activation energy, and is symbolized Ea. The ball has a lot of potential energy at the top of the hill. However, if the ball is stuck in a small depression, it won't roll down the hill, even though that action is exergonic. To start the ball rolling, a small amount of energy (activation energy) is needed to get the ball out of the depression. In a chemical reaction, the activation energy is the energy needed to change the reactants into unstable molecular forms called transition-state species. Transition-state species have higher free energies than either the reactants or the products. Their bonds may be stretched and hence unstable. Although the amount of activation energy needed for different reactions varies, it is often small compared with the change in free energy of the reaction. The activation energy that starts a reaction is recovered during the ensuing "downhill" phase of the reaction, so it is not a part of the net free energy change, ?G. Where does the activation energy come from? In any collection of reactants at room or body temperature, molecules are moving around and could use their kinetic energy of motion to overcome the energy barrier, enter the transition state, and react 12). However, at normal temperatures, only a few molecules have enough energy to do this; most have insufficient kinetic energy for activation. If the system were heated, all the reactant molecules would move faster and have more kinetic energy. Since more of them would have energy exceeding the required activation energy, the reaction would speed up. However, adding enough heat to increase the average kinetic energy of the molecules is not an effective option for living systems. Such a general, nonspecific approach would accelerate all the reactions, including destructive ones, such as the denaturation of proteins (see Chapter 3). Another, biologically more effective way to speed up a reaction is to lower the activation energy barrier. In living cells, enzymes accomplish this task.6.3.2 Enzymes bind specific reactant molecules103All types of catalysts speed chemical reactions. Most non-biological catalysts are nonspecific and work on a variety of reactants. For example, powdered platinum catalyzes virtually any reaction in which molecular hydrogen (H2) is a reactant. In contrast, most biological catalysts are proteins called enzymes, and they are highly specific. An enzyme usually recognizes and binds to only one or a few closely related reactants, and it catalyzes only a single chemical reaction. In an enzyme-catalyzed reaction, the reactants are called substrates. Substrate molecules bind to a particular site on the enzyme surface, called the active site, where catalysis takes place.  The specificity of an enzyme results from the exact three-dimensional shape and structure of its active site. Only a narrow range of substrates fit into the active site. Other molecules-with different shapes, different functional groups, and different properties-cannot properly fit and bind to the active site. The names of enzymes reflect the specificity of their functions. For example, the enzyme RNA polymerase will catalyze the formation of RNA, but not DNA, and the enzyme hexokinase accelerates the phosphorylation of hexose sugars, but not pentose sugars. Most, but not all, names of enzymes end in the suffix "-ase." The binding of a substrate to the active site produces an enzyme-substrate complex held together by one or more means, such as hydrogen bonding, ionic attraction, or covalent bonding. The enzyme-substrate complex gives rise to product and free enzyme: E + S ? ES ? E + P. where E is the enzyme, S is the substrate, P is the product, and ES is the enzyme-substrate complex. The free enzyme (E) is in the same chemical form at the end of the reaction as at the beginning. While bound to the substrate, it may change chemically, but by the end of the reaction it has been restored to its initial form.6.3.3 Enzymes lower the activation energy barrier but do not affect equilibrium 104The formation of an enzyme-substrate complex results in a lower activation energy than the transition-state species of the corresponding uncatalyzed reaction. Thus the enzyme lowers the energy barrier for the reaction-it offers the reaction an easier path. When an enzyme lowers the activation energy barrier, both the forward and the reverse reactions speed up, so the enzyme-catalyzed overall reaction proceeds toward equilibrium more rapidly than the uncatalyzed reaction. The final equilibrium (and ?G) is the same with or without the enzyme. The enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, for example, catalyzes the highly reversible reaction pyruvate ßà lactate. We will study this reaction in the next chapter. But for now, what is the substrate for this reaction? The answer is, either pyruvate or lactate. When we exercise vigorously, the reaction proceeds to the right because there is a lot of pyruvate around. Lactate builds up in our muscles (and we get cramps). Lactate moves into the blood, and the blood system takes it from the muscles to the liver, where lactate dehydrogenase catalyzes its conversion back to pyruvate. In the meantime, the lactate concentration in our muscles is now lower, so lactate dehydrogenase in the muscles catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to lactate. This is an excellent example of how concentrations of substrates affect the net direction of a reversible reaction. Adding an enzyme to a reaction does not change the difference in free energy (?G) between the reactants and the products. It does change the activation energy and, consequently, the rate of reaction. If 600 molecules of a protein with arginine as its terminal amino acid just sit in solution, thermodynamically the proteins tend toward disorder and the terminal peptide bonds break, releasing the arginines (?S increases). After 7 years, about half (300) of the proteins will have undergone this spontaneous reaction. With the enzyme carboxypeptidase A catalyzing the reaction, the 300 arginines are released in half a second!6.3.4 What are the chemical events at active sites of enzymes? 105How does an enzyme speed up the rate of a reaction? Like any substance that binds to a protein, a substrate interacts with the active site of an enzyme by shape and by chemical interactions. The chemical interactions contribute directly to the breaking of old bonds and the formation of new ones. In catalyzing a particular reaction, an enzyme may use one or more of the following mechanisms. While free in solution, substrates are rotating and tumbling around and may not have the proper orientation to interact when they collide. Part of the activation energy is used to make the substrates collide with the right atoms for bond formation next to each other. When proteins are synthesized, for example, a peptide bond is formed between the carboxyl group of one amino acid and the amino group of the next. For two amino acids to collide and form a peptide bond, these two chemical groups must be the sites of collision. When the active site of an enzyme binds to oneamino acid, it is held in the right orientation to react with a second amino acid substrate when it binds to the enzyme. The side chains (R groups) of an enzyme's amino acids may be direct participants in making its substrates more chemically reactive. For example, in acid-base catalysis, the acidic or basic side chains of the amino acids forming the active site may transfer H+ to or from the substrate, destabilizing a covalent bond in the substrate and permitting it to break. In covalent catalysis, a functional group in a side chain forms a temporary covalent bond with a portion of the substrate. In metal ion catalysis, metal ions such as copper, zinc, iron, and manganese, which are firmly bound to side chains of the protein, can lose or gain electrons without altering the bonds that hold them to the protein. This ability makes them important participants in oxidation-reduction reactions, which involve loss or gain of electrons.enzymes induce strain in the substrate. Once a substrate has bound to the active site, the enzyme can cause bonds in the substrate to stretch, putting it in an unstable transition state. For example, the carbohydrate substrate for the enzyme lysozyme enters the active site in a flat-ringed "chair" shape, but the active site quickly causes it to flatten out into a "sofa." The resulting stretching of its bonds causes them to be less stable and more reactive to the other substrate, water.6.3.5 Substrate concentration affects reaction rate 105For a reaction of the type A ? B, the rate of the uncatalyzed reaction is directly proportional to the concentration of A. The higher the concentration of substrate, the more collisions, and the more reactions per unit of time (higher rate). Addition of the appropriate enzyme speeds up the reaction, of course, but it also changes the shape of the plot of rate versus substrate concentration. At first, the rate of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction increases as the substrate concentration increases, but then it levels off. When further increases in the substrate concentration do not significantly increase the reaction rate, the maximum rate is attained. Since the concentration of an enzyme is usually much lower than that of its substrate, what we are seeing is a saturation phenomenon like the one that occurs in facilitated diffusion (see Chapter 5). When all the enzyme molecules are bound to substrate molecules, the enzyme is working as fast as it can-at its maximum rate. Nothing is gained by adding more substrate, because no free enzyme molecules are left to act as catalysts. The maximum rate of an enzyme reaction can be used to measure how efficient the enzyme can be-that is, how many molecules of substrate are converted to product per unit of time when there is an excess of substrate present. This turnover number ranges from 1 molecule every 2 seconds for lysozyme to an amazing 40 million molecules per second for the liver enzyme catalase.6.4 Molecular Structure Determines Enzyme Function 106Most enzymes are much larger than their substrates. An enzyme is typically a protein with hundreds of amino acids, and its substrate is generally not a macromolecule at all, but a small-molecule metabolite. The active site of the enzyme is usually quite small, not more than 6-12 amino acids. Two questions arise from this observation: What is the nature of the active site that allows it to recognize and bind the substrate? What is the role of the rest of the huge protein?6.4.1 The active site is specific to the substrate 106The remarkable ability of an enzyme to select exactly the right substrate depends on a precise interlocking of molecular shapes and interactions of chemical groups at the binding site. The binding of the substrate to the active site depends on the same kinds of forces that maintain the tertiary structure of the enzyme: hydrogen bonds, the attraction and repulsion of electrically charged groups, and hydrophobic interactions (see Chapter 3). In 1894, the German chemist Emil Fischer compared the fit between an enzyme and its substrate to that of a lock and key. Fischer's model persisted for more than half a century with only indirect evidence to support it. The first direct evidence came in 1965, when David Phillips and his colleagues at the Royal Institution in London succeeded in crystallizing the enzyme lysozyme and determined its tertiary structure using the techniques of X-ray crystallography (described in Chapter 11). They observed a pocket in lysozyme that neatly fits its substrate.6.4.2 An enzyme changes shape when it binds a substrate 106Fischer's idea has turned out to be largely correct, with one modification. Studies on enzyme inhibitors were done to see if molecules similar to a substrate could fit into an active site on an enzyme and prevent the real substrate from binding. The first such experiments were successful in that the mimic "substrates" did bind to the enzyme, but they did not react. Likewise, a false key can fit into a lock, but the lock will not turn. Then, remarkable, some enzyme inhibitors were found that were considerably larger than the real substrate, yet were effective. How could a key twice as large as the real one fit into the lock? It is here that the Fischer lock and key analogy breaks down. The answer is that enzymes are flexible, and their active sites can change (expand) to fit substrates. When the substrate binds, the enzyme changes shape, exposing the parts of itself that react with the substrate. This change in enzyme shape caused by substrate binding is called induced fit. Induced fit can be observed in the enzyme hexokinase when it is studied with and without one of its substrates, glucose (its other substrate is ATP). It catalyzes the reaction: Glucose + ATP ? glucose 6-phosphate + ADP. Induced fit brings reactive side chains from the enzyme's active site into alignment with the substrates, facilitating the catalytic mechanisms described earlier. Equally important, the folding of hexokinase to fit around the glucose substrate excludes water from the active site. This is essential, because the two molecules binding to the active site are glucose and ATP. If water were present, ATP would be rapidly hydrolyzed to ADP and phosphate. But since water is absent, the transfer of a phosphate from ATP to glucose is favored. Induced fit at least partly explains why enzymes are so large. The rest of the molecule may have two roles: It provides a framework so that the amino acids of the active site are properly positioned in relation to the substrate. It participates in the small but significant changes in protein shape and structure that result in induced fit.6.4.3 To operate, some enzymes require added molecules 107Whether they consist of a single, folded polypeptide chain or several subunits, many enzymes require other, nonprotein molecules in order to function. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as copper, zinc, and iron that bind temporarily to certain enzymes and are essential to their function. Coenzymes are carbon-containing molecules that are required for the action of one or more enzymes. Coenzymes are usually relatively small compared with the enzyme to which they temporarily bind. Prosthetic groups are permanently bound to their enzymes. They include the heme groups that are attached to the oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobin. Because coenzymes are not permanently bound to the enzyme, they must react with it as a substrate does. For the catalyzed reaction to proceed, coenzymes must collide with the enzyme and bind to its active site just as the substrate must. A coenzyme can be considered a substrate because it changes chemically during the reaction and then separates from the enzyme to participate in other reactions. Coenzymes move from enzyme molecule to enzyme molecule, adding or removing chemical groups from the substrate. ATP and ADP can be considered coenzymes, because they are necessary for some reactions, are changed by reactions, and bind to and detach from the enzyme. In the next chapter, we will encounter coenzymes that function in energy processing by accepting or donating electrons or hydrogen atoms. In animals, some coenzymes are produced from vitamins that must be obtained from food-they cannot be synthesized by the body. 6.5 Metabolism and the Regulation of Enzymes 108All organisms need to maintain stable internal conditions, or homeostasis. Thus we and all other organisms must regulate our metabolism. The regulation of the rates at which our thousands of different enzymes operate contributes to metabolic homeostasis. In the remainder of this chapter, we will investigate the role of enzymes in organizing and regulating metabolism. In living cells, the activity of enzymes can be inhibited in various ways, so the presence of an enzyme does not necessarily ensure that it is functioning. There are mechanisms to alter the rate at which some enzymes catalyze reactions, making enzymes the target points at which entire sequences of chemical reactions can be regulated. Finally, we examine how the environment-namely, temperature and pH-affects enzyme activity.6.5.1 Metabolism is organized into pathways 108An organism's metabolism is the totality of the biochemical reactions that take place within it. Metabolism transforms raw materials and stored potential energy into forms that can be used by living cells. Metabolism consists of sequences of enzyme-catalyzed chemical reactions called pathways. Some metabolic pathways are anabolic, and synthesize the important chemical building blocks from which macromolecules are built. Others are catabolic, breaking down molecules for usable free energy. The balance among these anabolic and catabolic pathways may change depending on the cell's (and the organism's) needs. So a cell must regulate all its metabolic pathways constantly.6.5.2 Enzyme activity is subject to regulation 108Various inhibitors can bind to enzymes, slowing down the rates of enzyme-catalyzed reactions. Some inhibitors occur naturally in cells; others are artificial. Naturally occurring inhibitors regulate metabolism; artificial ones can be used to treat disease, to kill pests, or in the laboratory to study how enzymes work. Some inhibitors irreversibly inhibit the enzyme by permanently binding to it. Others have reversible effects; that is, they can become unbound from the enzyme. The removal of a natural reversible inhibitor increases an enzyme's rate of catalysis. Some inhibitors irreversibly covalently bond to certain side chains at active sites of enzymes, thereby inactivating the enzymes by destroying their capacity to interact with the normal substrate. Such inhibitors are generally not natural products. A compound called DIPF (diisopropylphophorofluoridate), for example, reacts with a hydroxyl group of the amino acid serine  at an enzyme's active site, preventing the use of this side chain in catalytic reactions. DIPF is an irreversible inhibitor for the protein-digesting enzyme trypsin and for many other enzymes whose active sites contain serine. Another DIPF-inhibited enzyme is acetylcholinesterase, which is essential for the orderly propagation of impulses from one nerve cell to another. Because of their effect on acetylcholinesterase, DIPF and other similar compounds are classified as nerve gases. One of them, Sarin, was used in an attack on the Tokyo subway in 1995, resulting in a dozen deaths and hundreds hospitalized. The widely used insecticide malathion is a derivative of DIPF that inhibits only insect acetylcholinesterase and not the mammalian enzyme.Not all inhibition is irreversible. Some inhibitors are similar enough to a particular enzyme's natural substrate to bind to the active site, yet different enough that the enzyme catalyzes no chemical reaction. While such a molecule is bound to the enzyme, the natural substrate cannot enter the active site; thus the inhibitor effectively wastes the enzyme's time, preventing its catalytic action. Such molecules are called competitive inhibitors because they compete with the natural substrate for the active site. In these cases, the inhibition is reversible. When the concentration of the competitive inhibitor is reduced, it detaches from the active site, and the enzyme is again active. The enzyme succinate dehydrogenase is subject to competitive inhibition. This enzyme, found in all mitochondria, catalyzes the conversion of the compound succinate to another compound, fumarate. The compound oxaloacetate is similar to succinate and can act as a competitive inhibitor of succinate dehydrogenase by binding to its active site. However, having bound to oxaloacetate, the enzyme can do nothing more with it-no reaction occurs. An enzyme molecule cannot bind a succinate molecule until the oxaloacetate molecule has moved out of the active site. Some inhibitors that do not react with the active site are called noncompetitive inhibitors. Noncompetitive inhibitors bind to the enzyme at a site distinct from the active site. Their binding can cause a conformational change in the enzyme that alters the active site. In this case, the active site may still bind substrate molecules, but the rate of product formation may be reduced. Noncompetitive inhibitors, like competitive inhibitors, can become unbound, so their effects are reversible.6.5.3 Allosteric enzymes have interacting subunits 109Many important enzymes have a quaternary structure consisting of two or more polypeptide subunits, each with a molecular weight in the tens of thousands (see Chapter 3). These subunits are bound together by various weak bonds that permit changes in the shape of one subunit to influence the shape and properties of the others. Multisubunit enzymes that undergo such changes in shape and function are called allosteric enzymes (allo-, "different"; -steric, "shape"). (Note that not all allosteric enzymes have multiple subunits; there are  some single-chain enzymes that are allosterically regulated.) The activity of allosteric enzymes is controlled by molecules called effectors, which may have no structural similarity either to the reactants or to the products of the reaction being catalyzed. Effectors bind to an allosteric site that is separate from the active site, changing the structure of the enzyme and thus its activity. Their binding may enhance or diminish reactions at the active site; thus, effectors may be activators or inhibitors.Allosteric enzymes and single-subunit enzymes differ greatly in their reaction rates when the substrate concentration is low. Graphs of reaction rate plotted against substrate concentration show this relationship. The reaction rate first increases very sharply with increasing substrate concentration, then tapers off to a constant maximum rate as the supply of enzyme becomes saturated with substrate. The plot for many allosteric enzymes is radically different, having a sigmoidal (S-shaped) appearance. The increase in rate with increasing substrate concentration is slight at low substrate concentrations, but within a certain range, the reaction rate is extremely sensitive to relatively small changes in substrate concentration. Because of this sensitivity, allosteric enzymes are important in regulating entire pathways and activities of a cell. We can understand this behavior in terms of interactions between the different kinds of subunits that make up an allosteric enzyme, which we'll examine next.An allosteric enzyme not only usually has more than one subunit, it usually has more than one type of subunit: A catalytic subunit has an active site that binds the enzyme's substrate. A regulatory subunit has one or more allosteric sites that bind specific effector molecules. Binding of either a substrate or an effector affects the structure of the enzyme as a whole. An allosteric enzyme can exist in two forms. The active form has catalytic activity, whereas the inactive form lacks activity. When the enzyme is in its active form, the active sites on the catalytic subunits can accept substrate. When the enzyme is in its inactive form, the allosteric sites on the regulatory subunits can accept inhibitor. An allosteric enzyme usually consists of two or more catalytic subunits and one or more regulatory subunits. The existence of two or more linked catalytic subunits allows for cooperativity, in which one subunit's activity influences the activity of its neighbors. When a molecule of substrate binds to the active site of one catalytic subunit of an allosteric enzyme, it causes a change in the other catalytic subunits, making it easier for substrate to bind to them. Conversely, when an allosteric inhibitor binds to the allosteric site of a regulatory subunit, it causes a different change in the catalytic subunits, making it harder for substrate to bind to them. This cooperativity between subunits makes an enzyme exquisitely sensitive to its molecular environment. The binding of just one substrate molecule makes it easier for further substrate molecules to react.Metabolic pathways typically involve a starting material, various intermediates, and a product, which is used for some purpose by the cell. In each pathway, there are a number of reactions, each forming an intermediate, and each catalyzed by a different enzyme. The first step in a pathway is called the commitment step, meaning that once this enzyme-catalyzed conversion occurs, the "ball is rolling," and the other conversions happen in sequence, leading to the final product. But what if the cell has no need for that product-for example, if it takes it up from its environment in adequate amounts? It would be energetically wasteful for the cell to continue making something it does not need. One way that cells solve this problem is to shut down the metabolic pathway by having the final product allosterically inhibit the enzyme that catalyzes the commitment step. This mechanism is called end-product inhibition. When the end product is present in a high concentration, some of it binds to an allosteric site on the commitment step enzyme, causing it to become inactive. We will describe other examples allosteric interactions in later chapters. These include: The binding of oxygen to hemoglobin, which shows a sigmoid relationship and cooperativity (Chapter 49). The binding of a hormone to its cellular receptor protein, which causes the protein to change shape and provides the signal to initiate reactions within the cell (Chapter 15). The binding of an inducer to a protein that regulates DNA expression (Chapter 12).6.5.4 Enzymes and their environment 111Enzymes enable cells to perform chemical reactions and carry out complex processes without using the extremes of temperature and pH employed by chemists in the laboratory. However, because of their three-dimensional structures and the chemistry of the side chains in their active sites, enzymes are highly sensitive to temperature and pH. We described the general effects of these factors on proteins in Chapter 3. Here, we examine their effects on enzyme function, which, of course, depends on enzyme structure and chemistry. The rates of most enzyme-catalyzed reactions depend on the pH of the medium in which they occur. Each enzyme is most active at a particular pH; its activity decreases as the solution is made more acidic or more basic than its "ideal" pH. Several factors contribute to this effect. One is the ionization of carboxyl, amino, and other groups on either the substrate or the enzyme. In neutral or basic solutions, carboxyl groups (COOH) release H+ to become negatively charged carboxylate groups (-COO-). Similarly, amino groups (-NH2) accept H+ ions in neutral or acidic solutions, becoming positively charged -NH3+ groups (see Chapter 2). Thus, in a neutral solution, a molecule with an amino group will be attracted electrically to another molecule that has a carboxyl group, because both groups are ionized and they have opposite charges.If the pH changes, however, the ionization of these groups may change. For example, at a low pH (high H+ concentration), the excess H+ may react with the -COO- to form COOH. If this happens, the group is no longer charged, and so cannot interact with other charged groups in the protein, so the folding of the protein is altered. If this occurs at the active site of an enzyme, it may no longer have the correct shape to bind to its substrate. The process of evolution matches enzymes and their work environments. For example, the protein-digesting enzyme pepsin, found only in the stomach, works best at the very low pH values that prevail in the stomach after a meal. In contrast, salivary amylase works best at neutral pH, which is characteristic of the mouth.Temperature affects enzyme activity. In general, warming increases the rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction because at higher temperatures a greater fraction of the reactant molecules have enough energy to provide the activation energy for the reaction. Temperatures that are too high, however, inactivate enzymes, because at high temperatures enzyme molecules vibrate and twist so rapidly that some of their noncovalent bonds break. When heat destroys their tertiary structure, enzymes become inactivated, or denatured (see Chapter 3). Some enzymes denature at temperatures only slightly above that of the human body, but a few are stable even at the boiling or freezing points of water. All enzymes, however, show an optimal temperature for activity.Individual organisms adapt to changes in the environment in many ways, one of which is based on groups of enzymes, called isozymes, that catalyze the same reaction but have different chemical compositions and physical properties. Different isozymes within a given group may have different optimal temperatures. The rainbow trout, for example, has several isozymes of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, whose operation is essential to normal transmission of nerve impulses. If a rainbow trout is transferred from warm water to near-freezing water (2¡C), the fish produces an isozyme of acetylcholinesterase that is different from the one it produces at the higher temperature. The new isozyme has a lower optimal temperature, which helps the fish to perform normally in the colder water. In general, enzymes adapted to warm temperatures fail to denature because their tertiary structures are held together largely by covalent bonds, such as disulfide links, instead of the more heat-sensitive weak chemical forces. Most enzymes in humans are more stable at high temperatures than those of the bacteria that infect us, so that a moderate fever tends to denature bacterial enzymes, but not our own.7 Cellular Pathways That Harvest Chemical EnergyThe use of crushed plant materials, such as grapes and barley, to make alcoholic beverages, such as wine and beer, is as ancient as recorded history. But how these transformations come about has only recently been deciphered. The arts of the winemaker and brewer came under the scrutiny of science in the nineteenth century. Things came to a head (so to speak) when the German chemist Justus von Liebig claimed that these transformations were simply chemical reactions, and not some special property of the once-living plant material. Biologists, on the other hand, armed with microscopes and their cell theory, said that grape and barley extracts were converted to wine and beer by cells. Initially, these two ideas seemed to conflict. Louis Pasteur, the great French scientist, tackled the issue in 1860. A group of distillers wanted to use sugar beets, which grow abundantly in regions of France, to produce alcohol. With careful observations, Pasteur noted three things: (1) nothing happened to the sugar beet mash unless tiny, living yeast cells were present; (2) in the presence of fresh air, yeast cells grew vigorously on the mash and bubbles of carbon dioxide were formed; and (3) without fresh air, the yeasts grew slowly, less carbon dioxide was produced, and alcohol was formed. Pasteur had shown that the production of alcohol by ground-up, sugary extracts was a property of living cells, thereby introducing the concept of biochemistry.Biochemists eventually identified the intermediate substances in the pathway between sugar and carbon dioxide and showed that each intermediate step is catalyzed by a specific enzyme. This examples sums up the concept of metabolism: the sum total of all of the chemical transformations in living systems as they break down simple sugars and other molecules in order to liberate energy and build up complex molecules. In this chapter, we will describe some aspects of metabolism, especially as they relate to the breakdown of sugars. The metabolism of sugars is important not only in making alcoholic beverages, but in providing the energy that organisms store in ATP-the energy you use all the time to fuel both conscious actions such as turning the pages of this book, and automatic ones such as the beating of your heart. Several principles govern metabolic pathways in the cell: Complex chemical transformations in the cell do not occur in a single reaction, but in a number of small steps that are connected in a pathway. Each reaction is catalyzed by a specific enzyme. Metabolic pathways are similar in all organisms. Many metabolic pathways are compartmentalized, with certain steps occuring inside an organelle. Metabolic pathways in organisms are regulated by the activities of a few enzymes. 7.1 Obtaining Energy and Electrons from Glucose 114The most common fuel for living cells is the sugar glucose (C6H12O6) Many other compounds serve as foods, but almost all of them are converted to glucose, or to intermediate compounds in the step-by-step metabolism of glucose. As you will see in this section, cells obtain energy from glucose by the chemical process of oxidation.7.1.1 Cells trap free energy while metabolizing glucose 114If glucose is burned in a flame, it readily forms carbon dioxide, water, and a lot of energy-but only if oxygen gas (O2) is present. The balanced equation for this combustion reaction is C6H12O6 + 6 O2 ? 6 CO2 + 6 H2O + energy (heat and light). The same equation applies to the metabolism of glucose in cells, except that metabolism is a multi-step, controlled series of reactions, ending up with almost half of the energy captured in ATP. The change in free energy (?G) for the complete conversion of glucose and oxygen to carbon dioxide and water, whether by combustion or by metabolism, is -686 kcal/mol (-2,870 kJ/mol). Thus the overall reaction is highly exergonic and can drive the endergonic formation of a great deal of ATP from ADP and phosphate. Some kinds of cells, unable to obtain or use oxygen gas, metabolize glucose incompletely, thus obtaining less ATP per glucose molecule. Not all of the carbon atoms of glucose are converted to carbon dioxide in this incomplete breakdown, which is called fermentation. Three metabolic processes play roles in the utilization of glucose for energy: glycolysis, cellular respiration, and fermentation 1). All of these processes consist of metabolic pathways made up of many distinct, but coupled, chemical reactions. Glycolysis is a series of reactions that begins the metabolism of glucose in all cells and produces the three-carbon product pyruvate. A small amount of the energy stored in glucose is released in usable form. Cellular respiration occurs when the environment is aerobic (contains oxygen gas, O2), and essentially converts pyruvate to carbon dioxide (CO2). In the process, a great deal of the energy stored in the covalent bonds of pyruvate is released and trapped in ATP. Fermentation occurs when the environment is anaerobic (lacking oxygen gas). Instead of energy-poor CO2, relatively energy-rich molecules such as lactic acid or ethanol are produced, so the energy extracted from glucose is far less than under aerobic conditions.7.1.2 Redox reactions transfer electrons and energy 115In Chapter 6, we described the addition of phosphate groups to ADP to make ATP as an endergonic reaction that can extract and store energy from exergonic reactions. Another way of transferring energy is to transfer electrons. A reaction in which one substance transfers one or more electrons to another substance is called an oxidation-reduction reaction, or redox reaction. The gain of one or more electrons by an atom, ion, or molecule is called reduction. The loss of one or more electrons is called oxidation. Although oxidation and reduction are always defined in terms of traffic in electrons, we may also think in these terms when hydrogen atoms (not hydrogen ions) are gained or lost, because transfers of hydrogen atoms involve transfers of electrons (H = H+ + e-). Thus, when a molecule loses hydrogen atoms, it becomes oxidized: Oxidation and reduction always occur together: As one material is oxidized, the electrons it loses are transferred to another material, reducing that material. In a redox reaction, we call the reactant that becomes reduced an oxidizing agent and the one that becomes oxidized a reducing agent. An oxidizing agent accepts electrons; in the process of oxidizing the reducing agent, the oxidizing agent itself becomes reduced. Conversely, the reducing agent donates electrons; it becomes oxidized as it reduces the oxidizing agent. In both the burning and the metabolism of glucose, glucose is the reducing agent and oxygen gas is the oxidizing agent. In a redox reaction, energy is transferred. Some of the energy originally present in the reducing agent becomes associated with the reduced product. (The rest remains in the reducing agent or is lost.) The overall ?G of a redox reaction is negative. As we will see, some of the key reactions of glycolysis and cellular respiration are highly exergonic redox reactions.7.1.3 The coenzyme NAD is a key electron carrier in redox ~ reactions 116The main pair of oxidizing and reducing agents in cells is based on the compound NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). NAD exists in two chemically distinct forms, one oxidized (NAD+) and the other reduced (NADH + H+). NAD+ and NADH + H+ participate in biological redox reactions. The reduction reaction: NAD+ + 2 H ? NADH + H+ is formally equivalent to the transfer of two hydrogen atoms (2 H+ + 2 e-). However, what is actually transferred is a hydride ion (H-, a proton and two electrons), leaving a free proton (H+). Oxygen gas (O2) is highly electronegative and readily accepts electrons from NADH. The oxidation of NADH + H+ by O2 is highly exergonic: NADH + H+ + 1/2 O2 ? NAD+ + H2O ?G = -52.4 kcal/mol (-219 kJ/mol) (Note that the oxidizing agent appears here as "1/2 O2" instead of "O." This notation emphasizes that it is oxygen gas, O2, that acts as the oxidizing agent.) In the same way that ATP can be thought of as a means of packaging free energy in bundles of about 12 kcal/mol (50 kJ/mol), NAD can be thought of as a means of packaging free energy in bundles of approximately 50 kcal/mol (200 kJ/mol). NAD is not the only electron carrier in cells. As you will see, another carrier, FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide), is also involved in transferring electrons during the metabolism of glucose. 7.2 An Overview: Releasing Energy from Glucose 116The three energy-extracting processes of cells may be divided into five distinct pathways. When O2 is available as the final electron acceptor, four pathways operate. Glycolysis takes place first, and is followed by the three pathways of cellular respiration: pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain. When O2 is unavailable, pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain do not function, and fermentation is added to the glycolytic pathway. These five chemical pathways, which we will consider one at a time, have different locations in the cell. In prokaryotes, the enzymes used in glycolysis, fermentation, and the citric acid cycle are soluble in the cytosol. The enzymes involved in pyruvate oxidation and the respiratory chain are associated with the inner surface of the plasma membrane or inward elaborations of that membrane (see Chapter 4). In eukaryotes, glycolysis and fermentation take place in the cytoplasm outside of the mitochondria. The enzymes for these pathways were once believed to be soluble in the cytosol, but more recent discoveries suggest that at least some of them may be bound to components of the cytoskeleton. The other reactions are associated with the mitochondria. Pyruvate oxidation and the respiratory chain are both associated with the inner membrane of mitochondria, where their enzymes are bound. The enzymes and reactions of the citric acid cycle are found in the mitochondrial matrix.Glycolysis begins the breakdown of glucose. It is a sequence of ten separate chemical reactions in which glucose is incompletely oxidized to pyruvate.It contains an oxidative step in which the electron carrier NAD+ becomes reduced, acquiring electrons. The major products of glycolysis are ATP, pyruvate, and the electrons acquired by NAD. Both the pyruvate and the electrons must be processed further. Cellular respiration operates when O2 is available, yielding CO2 and H2O as products. It is made up of three pathways: pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain. In pyruvate oxidation, the end product of glycolysis (pyruvate) is oxidized to acetate, which is activated by the addition of a coenzyme and further metabolized by the citric acid cycle. The citric acid cycle is a cyclic series of reactions in which the acetate becomes completely oxidized, forming CO2 and transferring electrons (along with their hydrogen nuclei) to carrier molecules. The citric acid cycle produces many more electrons than are produced in glycolysis. And, as we are about to see, harvesting more electrons means a greater ultimate harvest of ATP. In glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, and the citric acid cycle, the electron carriers NAD+ and FAD become reduced and acquire hydrogen atoms. Through these pathways, energy originally present in the covalent bonds of glucose becomes associated with reduced forms of these carriers (NADH + H+ and FADH2). The fourth energy-extracting pathway for aerobic cells is the respiratory chain, which releases energy from the reduced NADH + H+ in such a way that it can be used to form ATP. This pathway consists of a series of redox reactions in which electrons derived from hydrogen atoms are passed from one type of carrier to another and finally are allowed to react with O2 to produce water. Hydrogen is an outstanding fuel. When it reacts with O2, a great deal of free energy is released; better still, the "waste" product of this reaction-water-is not toxic to the environment or to any organism that produces it.The transfer of electrons along the respiratory chain drives the active transport of hydrogen ions (protons) from the mitochondrial matrix into the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial membrane. This active transport sets up an imbalance of both concentration and charge across the membrane.As we saw in Chapter 6, such imbalances represent potential energy. This energy is recaptured by the subsequent diffusion of protons back into the matrix, which is coupled to the synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi. Overall, the inputs to the respiratory chain are hydrogen atoms and O2, and the outputs are water and energy captured as ATP. In the discussion that follows, we will examine in more detail the four pathways of aerobic energy metabolism (glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain) and fermentation. 7.3 Glycolysis: From Glucose to Pyruvate 118Glycolysis (also called the glycolytic pathway) takes place in the cytoplasm. It may be regarded as a common pathway to be followed either by cellular respiration or, under anaerobic conditions, fermentation. In glycolysis, glucose is only partly oxidized. A molecule of glucose taken in by a cell enters the glycolytic pathway, which consists of 10 reactions that convert the six-carbon glucose molecule, step by step, into two molecules of the three-carbon compound pyruvate (pyruvic acid).* These reactions are accompanied by the net formation of two molecules of ATP and by the reduction of two molecules of NAD+ to two molecules of NADH + H+. At the end of the glycolytic pathway, then, energy has been transferred to ATP, and four hydrogen atoms have been transferred to NADH + H+. *We tend to use words like "pyruvate" and "pyruvic acid" interchangeably. However, at the pH values commonly found in cells, the ionized form-pyruvate-is present rather than the acid-pyruvic acid. Similarly, all carboxylic acids are present as ions (the "-ate" forms) at these pH values. Glycolysis can be divided into two groups of reactions: energy-investing reactions that use ATP and energy-harvesting reactions that produce ATP.7.3.1 The energy-investing reactions of glycolysis require ATP 118The first five reactions are endergonic; that is, the cell is investing free energy rather than gaining it during the early reactions of glycolysis. In separate reactions, two molecules of ATP are invested in attaching two phosphate groups to the sugar molecule (reactions 1 and 3), thereby raising its free energy by about 15 kcal/mol (62.7 kJ/mol). Later, these phosphate groups will be transferred to ADP to make new molecules of ATP. Although both of these first steps of glycolysis use ATP as one of their substrates, each is catalyzed by a different, specific enzyme. The enzyme hexokinase catalyzes reaction 1, in which a phosphate group from ATP is attached to the six-carbon glucose molecule, forming glucose 6-phosphate. (A kinase is any enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to another substrate.) In reaction 2, the six-membered glucose ring is rearranged into a five-membered fructose ring. Then, in reaction 3, the enzyme phosphofructokinase adds a second phosphate (taken from another ATP) to the fructose ring, forming a six-carbon sugar bisphosphate. The root bis- means "two." A sugar bisphosphate has two phosphate groups attached to two different carbons, as opposed to the prefix di-, which implies the serial attachment of two phosphate groups to one carbon, as in ADP (adenosine diphosphate). The fourth reaction opens up and cleaves the six-carbon sugar ring to give two different three-carbon sugar phosphates. In reaction 5, one of them, dihydroxyacetone phosphate, is converted into a second molecule of the other one, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). By this time-the halfway point of the glycolytic pathway-the following things have happened: Two molecules of ATP have been invested, and the six-carbon glucose molecule has been converted into two molecules of a three-carbon sugar phosphate,G3P. No ATP has been gained, and nothing has been oxidized.7.3.2 The energy-harvesting reactions of glycolysis yield ATP and NADH + H+ 119In the discussion that follows, remember that each reaction occurs twice for each glucose molecule going through glycolysis, because in the first five reactions, each glucose molecule has been split into two molecules of G3P. Reaction 6 is a three-step reaction catalyzed by the enzyme triose phosphate dehydrogenase. Its end product is a phosphate ester, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG). Reaction 6 is accompanied by an enormous drop in free energy-more than 100 kcal of energy per mole of glucose is released in this extremely exergonic reaction. What has happened here? Why the big energy change? In the first step of reaction 6, a phosphate ion is snatched from the surroundings (but not, this time, from ATP) and tacked onto G3P. Since this is an oxidation reaction, it is very exergonic. The third step, the formation of a phosphate ester (BPG) from an acid is slightly endergonic, but not nearly enough to offset the drop in free energy from the oxidation. If this big energy drop were simply a loss of heat, glycolysis would not provide useful energy to the cell. However, rather than being lost, this energy is stored by reducing two molecules of NAD+ to make two molecules of NADH + H+. This stored energy is regained later-either in the respiratory chain, by the formation of ATP, or in the last step of fermentation, in which pyruvate or its product is reduced by the two molecules of NADH + H+ , forming NAD+. Because NAD+ is present in small amounts in the cell, it must be recycled to keep glycolysis going; if none of the NADH is oxidized back to NAD+, glycolysis comes to a halt.The remaining steps of glycolysis are simpler. The two phosphate groups of BPG are transferred, one at a time, to molecules of ADP, with a rearrangement in between. More than 20 kcal (83.6 kJ/mol) of free energy is stored in ATP for every mole of BPG broken down. Finally, we are left with two moles of pyruvate for every mole of glucose that entered glycolysis. The enzyme-catalyzed transfer of phosphate groups from donor molecules to ADP molecules (reaction 7) is called substrate-level phosphorylation. This process is driven by energy obtained from oxidation. For example, when G3P reacts with a phosphate group (Pi) and NAD+, becomingBPG, an aldehyde is oxidized to a carboxylic acid, with NAD+ acting as the oxidizing agent. The oxidation provides so much energy that the newly added phosphate group is linked to the rest of the molecule by a bond that has even more energy than the terminal phosphate-to-phosphate bond of ATP. A second enzyme, phosphoglycerate kinase, catalyzes the transfer of this phosphate group from BPG to ADP in reaction 7, forming ATP 8b). Both reactions are exergonic, even though a substantial amount of energy is consumed in the formation of ATP. A review of the glycolytic pathway shows that at the beginning of glycolysis, two molecules of ATP are used per molecule of glucose, but that ultimately four molecules of ATP are produced (two for each of the twoBPG molecules)-a net gain of two ATP molecules and two NADH + H+. When fermentation follows glycolysis, the total usable energy yield is just these two ATP molecules per glucose molecule. Under anaerobic conditions, the NADH + H+ is rapidly recycled to NAD+ by the reduction of pyruvate. The NAD+ is then available for the glycolytic reaction catalyzed by the enzyme triose phosphate dehydrogenase. On the other hand, in the presence of oxygen, eukaryotes and some bacteria are able to reap far more energy by completely oxidizing pyruvate and by oxidizing NADH + H+ through the respiratory chain, as we will see in the sections that follow. In eukaryotes, these reactions take place in the mitochondria. 7.4 Pyruvate Oxidation 122The oxidation of pyruvate to acetate is the link between glycolysis and cellular respiration. Pyruvate oxidation is a multi-step reaction catalyzed by an enormous enzyme complex that is attached to the inner mitochondrial membrane. Pyruvate diffuses into the mitochondrion, where it is oxidized. In this reaction, the pyruvate, a three-carbon compound, loses two hydrogen atoms and a carboxyl group (-COO-). The reaction yields the two-carbon compound acetate (CH3COO-),as well as free energy and CO2. The free energy is captured when the acetate is linked to a coenzyme, called coenzyme A (CoA), producing acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA). Acetyl CoA has 7.5 kcal/mol (31.4 kJ/mol) more energy than simple acetate. (Acetyl CoA can donate acetate to acceptors such as oxaloacetate, much as ATP can donate phosphate groups to various acceptors.) There are three steps in this oxidation reaction: Pyruvate is oxidized to acetate, and CO2 is released. Part of the energy from the oxidation in the first step is saved by the reduction of NAD+ to NADH + H+. Some of the remaining energy is stored temporarily by the combining of acetate with CoA. An analogous three-step reaction occurs in reaction 6 of the glycolytic pathway, when G3P is converted to BPG. In that reaction, an aldehyde group is oxidized to an acid, some of the energy released by oxidation is stored in NADH + H+, and some of the remaining energy is preserved in a second phosphate bond in the BPG molecule. As the similarity between these two three-step reactions shows, a good metabolic idea is likely to appear more than once; we will see it again in the citric acid cycle. As you might suspect, a complex set of steps such as those in pyruvate oxidation requires more than one type of catalytic protein. This reaction is catalyzed by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, a huge multi-protein machine that consists of 72 polypeptide chains-24 each of three different protein molecules, for a total molecular weight of 4.6 million. The three component enzymes use a total of five different coenzymes. 7.5 The Citric Acid Cycle 122Acetyl CoA is the starting point for the citric acid cycle (also called the Krebs cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle). This pathway, which consists of eight reactions, completely oxidizes the two-carbon molecule of acetate to two molecules of carbon dioxide. The free energy released from these reactions is captured by NAD, FAD, and ADP. The metabolism of glucose to pyruvate is accompanied by a drop in free energy of about 140 kcal/mol (585 kJ/mol). About a third of this energy is captured in the formation of ATP and reduced NAD (NADH + H+). Oxidizing pyruvate to acetate yields much additional free energy. The citric acid cycle takes acetate and breaks it down to CO2, using the hydrogen atoms to reduce carrier molecules and passing chemical free energy to those carriers in the process. The reduced carriers are later oxidized in the respiratory chain, which transfers an enormous amount of free energy to ATP. The principal inputs to the citric acid cycle are acetate (in the form of acetyl CoA), water, and oxidized electron carriers. The principal outputs are carbon dioxide and reduced electron carriers. Overall, for each molecule of acetate, the citric acid cycle removes two carbons as CO2 and uses four pairs of hydrogen atoms to reduce carrier molecules.7.5.1 The citric acid cycle produces two CO2 molecules and reduced carriers 122At the beginning of the citric acid cycle, acetyl CoA, which has two carbon atoms in its acetate group, reacts with a four-carbon acid, oxaloacetate, to form the six-carbon compound citrate (citric acid). The remainder of the cycle consists of a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions in which citrate is degraded to a new four-carbon molecule of oxaloacetate. This new oxaloacetate can react with a second acetyl CoA, producing a second molecule of citrate and thus enabling the cycle to continue. Acetyl CoA enters the cycle from pyruvate oxidation, and CO2 exits. The citric acid cycle is maintained in a steady state-that is, although materials enter and leave and intermediate compounds are formed as they are metabolized, the concentrations of molecules in the cycle do not change much. The energy temporarily stored in acetyl CoA drives the formation of citrate from oxaloacetate (reaction 1). During this reaction, the coenzyme A molecule falls away, to be recycled. In reaction 2, the citrate molecule is rearranged to form isocitrate. In reaction 3, a CO2 molecule and two hydrogen atoms are removed, converting isocitrate to ?-ketoglutarate. This reaction produces a large drop in free energy. The released energy is stored in NADH + H+ and can be recovered later in the respiratory chain, when the NADH + H+ is reoxidized.Like the oxidation of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, reaction 4 of the citric acid cycle is complex. The five-carbon ?-ketoglutarate molecule is oxidized to the four-carbon molecule succinate. In the process, CO2 is given off, some of the oxidation energy is stored in NADH + H+, and some of the energy is preserved temporarily by combining succinate with CoA to form succinyl CoA. In reaction 5, the energy in succinyl CoA is harvested to make GTP (guanosine triphosphate) from GDP and Pi, which is another example of substrate-level phosphorylation. GTP is then used to make ATP from ADP. Free energy is released in reaction 6, in which the succinate released from succinyl CoA in reaction 5 is oxidized to fumarate. In the process, two hydrogens are transferred to an enzyme that contains the carrier FAD. After a molecular rearrangement (reaction 7), one more NAD+ reduction occurs, producing oxaloacetate from malate (reaction 8). These two reactions illustrate a common biochemical mechanism: Water (H2O) is added in reaction 7 to form an -OH group, and then the H from that -OH group is removed in reaction 8 to reduce NAD+ to NADH + H+. Essentially, these two reactions provide energy by using a very abundant substance (H2O). The final product, oxaloacetate, is ready to combine with another acetate from acetyl CoA and go around the cycle again. The citric acid cycle operates twice for each glucose molecule that enters glycolysis.Although most of the enzymes of the citric acid cycle are dissolved in the mitochondrial matrix, there are two exceptions: succinate dehydrogenase, which catalyzes reaction 6, and ?-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, which catalyzes reaction 4. These enzymes are integral membrane proteins of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Generations of students have asked the question, "Why did this complicated system evolve to achieve the simple goal of oxidizing two carbon acetate units to CO2?" There are two reasons. First, the cycle includes molecules that have other roles in the cell. As we will see later in this chapter, the intermediates of the citric acid cycle are themselves catabolic (breakdown) products or anabolic (synthesis) sources of other molecules, such as amino acids and nucleotides. Second, the citric cycle is far more efficient at tapping off energy than any single reaction could be. 7.6 The Respiratory Chain: Electrons, Proton Pumping, and ATP 125Without NAD+ and FAD, the oxidative steps of glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, and the citric acid cycle could not occur. Once reduced, these carriers must have some place to donate their hydrogens (H+ + e-). The fate of these protons and electrons is the rest of the story of cellular respiration. The story has three parts: First, the electrons pass through a series of membrane-associated electron carriers called the respiratory chain. Second, the flow of electrons along the chain causes the active transport of protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane, out of the matrix, creating a concentration gradient. Third, the protons diffuse back into the mitochondrial matrix through a proton channel, which couples this diffusion to the synthesis of ATP. The overall process of ATP synthesis resulting from electron transport through the respiratory chain is called oxidative phosphorylation.7.6.1 The respiratory chain transports electrons and releases energy 125The respiratory chain contains three components: Three large protein complexes, containing carrier molecules and their associated enzymes; a small protein called cytochrome c; a nonprotein component called ubiquinone (abbreviated Q). The large protein complexes are bound to the folds of the inner mitochondrial membranes, the cristae, in eukaryotes, or to the plasma membrane of aerobic prokaryotes. Cytochrome c is a peripheral membrane protein that lies in the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes, loosely attached to the inner membrane. Ubiquinone (Q) is a small, nonpolar molecule that moves freely within the hydrophobic interior of the phospholipid bilayer of the inner membrane. NADH + H+ passes hydrogens to Q by way of the first large protein complex, NADH-Q reductase, which contais 26 polypeptides and attached prosthetic groups. NADH-Q reductase passes the hydrogens to Q, forming QH2. Cytochrome reductase, with 10 subunits, receives hydrogens from QH2 and passes them to cytochrome c. Cytochrome oxidase, with 8 subunits, receives electrons from cytochrome c and passes them to oxygen. Reduced oxygen picks up two hydrogen ions (H+) to form H2O. Different subunits within each of these large protein complexes bear different electron carriers, so electrons are transported within each complex, as well as from complex to complex.The electron carriers of the respiratory chain (including those contained in the three protein complexes) differ as to how they change when they become reduced. NAD+, for example, accepts H- (a hydride ion-one proton and two electrons), leaving the proton from the other hydrogen atom to float free: NADH + H+. Other carriers, including Q, bind both protons and both electrons, becoming, for example, QH2. The remainder of the chain, however, is only an electron transport process. Electrons, but not protons, are passed from Q to cytochrome c. An electron from QH2 reduces a cytochrome's Fe3+ to Fe2+. Electrons pour into the pool of Q molecules from the NADH + H+ pathway, and some come from another source: the succinate-to-fumarate reaction of the citric acid cycle. Another protein complex, succinate-Q reductase, links the oxidation of succinate to the reduction of Q. The enzyme that constitutes the first part of succinate-Q reductase has attached to it an FAD carrier molecule, which is reduced by succinate to FADH2. Later, hydrogen atoms are transferred to the Q molecules. No protons are pumped, and hence no ATP is generated in the succinate-to-Q branch of the respiratory chain. Why should the respiratory chain have so many links? Well, to begin with, no enzyme will catalyze the direct oxidation of NADH + H+ by oxygen. More fundamentally, this would be an untamable reaction. It would be terrifically exergonic-rather like setting off a stick of dynamite in the cell. There is no biochemical way to harvest that burst of energy efficiently and put it to physiological use (that is, no metabolic reaction is so endergonic as to consume a significant fraction of that energy in a single step). To control the release of energy during oxidation of glucose in a cell, evolution has produced the lengthy respiratory chain we observe today: a series of reactions, each releasing a small, manageable amount of energy. Electron transport within each of the three protein complexes results, as we'll see, in the pumping of protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane, and the return of the protons across the membrane leads to the formation of ATP. Thus the energy originally contained in glucose and other foods is finally tucked into the cellular energy currency, ATP. For each pair of electrons passed along the respiratory chain from NADH + H+ to oxygen, three molecules of ATP are formed. If only electrons are carried through the final reactions of the respiratory chain, what happens to H+? And how is electron transport coupled to ATP production?7.6.2 Active proton transport is followed by diffusion coupled to ATP synthesis 126As we have seen, all the carriers and enzymes of the respiratory chain (except cytochrome c) are embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane. The operation of the respiratory chain results in the active transport of protons (H+) against their concentration gradient, across the inner membrane of the mitochondrion from inside to outside ("outside" being the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes). This occurs because the carriers are arranged on the three large complexes such that protons are produced on one side (the intermembrane space) and transported along with electrons to the other side (facing the mitochondrial matrix). Because of the charge on the proton (H+), this transport causes not only a difference in proton concentration, but also a difference in electric charge across the membrane, with the inside of the organelle (the matrix) more negative than the outside. Together, the proton concentration gradient and the charge difference constitute a source of potential energy called the proton-motive force. This force tends to drive the protons back across the membrane, just as the charge on a battery drives the flow of electrons, discharging the battery. The conversion of the proton-motive force into kinetic energy is prevented by the fact that the lipid bilayer of the inner membrane is impermeable to protons. However, they can diffuse across the membrane by passing through a specific channel protein, called ATP synthase, that couples proton movement to the synthesis of ATP. This coupling of proton-motive force and ATP synthesis is called the chemiosmotic mechanism.The chemiosmotic mechanism has three parts: The flow of electrons from NADH (or FADH) from one electron carrier to another in the respiratory chain is a series of exergonic reactions that occurs in the inner mitochondrial membrane. These exergonic reactions drive the endergonic pumping of H+ out of the mitochondrial matrix and across the inner membrane into the intermembrane space. This pumping forms a H+ gradient. The potential energy of the H+ gradient, or proton-motive force, is harnessed by ATP synthase. This protein has two roles: It acts as a channel allowing the H+ to diffuse back into the matrix, and it uses the energy of that diffusion to make ATP from ADP and Pi. ATP synthesis is a reversible reaction, and ATP synthase can also act as an ATPase, hydrolyzing ATP to ADP and Pi: ATP reverse arrows ADP + Pi + free energy. If the reaction goes to the right, free energy is released, and is used to pump H+ out of the mitochondrial matrix. If the reaction goes to the left, it uses free energy from H+ diffusion into the matrix to make ATP. What makes it prefer ATP synthesis? There are two answers to this question. First, ATP is removed from the mitochondrial matrix as soon as it is made, keeping the ATP concentration in the matrix low and driving the reaction toward the left. A person hydrolyzes about 1025 ATP molecules per day, and clearly the vast majority are recycled. Second, the H+ gradient is constantly replenished by electron pumping. (The electrons, you recall, come from the oxidation of NADH, which itself gets reduced by the oxidations of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. So, one reason for eating food is to replenish the H+ gradient!)ATP synthase is a large multi-protein machine, having 16 different polypeptides in mammals. It has two visible and functional parts. One is the membrane channel for H+. The other, which sticks out into the mitochondrial matrix like a lollipop, is the actual ATP synthesis (or ATP hydrolysis) active site. The actual mechanism of energy transduction involves the physical rotation of the core of the enzyme, with this rotational energy transferred to ATP. two experiments demonstrate the chemiosmotic mechanism. Two key experiments have shown that (1) a proton (H+) gradient and proton-motive force across a membrane can drive ATP synthesis; and (2) the enzyme ATP synthase is the catalyst for it. Experiment 1 "fooled" mitochondria into making ATP by raising the H+ concentration in their environment. A sample of isolated mitochondria with a low H+ concentration was suddenly put in an acidic medium with a high concentration of H+. The outer mitochondrial membrane, unlike the inner one, is freely permeable to H+, so H+ rapidly diffused into the intermembrane space. This created an artificial gradient across the inner membrane, which the mitochondrion used to make ATP from ADP and Pi. In Experiment 2, a proton pump from a bacterium was added to artificial membrane vesicles. It proceeded to pump H+ into the vesicles, creating a gradient. If mammalian ATP synthase was then put into the membranes of these vesicles, it made ATP even in the absence of the usual electron carriers. These experiments show that the key to ATP synthesis is the H+ gradient; it does not matter whether this gradient is produced naturally by the electron transport chain, or artificially by an experimenter. For the chemiosmotic mechanism to work, the diffusion of H+ and the formation of ATP must be tightly coupled; that is, the protons must pass through the ATP synthase channel in order to move inward. If a simple H+ diffusion channel (not ATP synthase) is inserted into the membrane, the energy of the H+ gradient is released as heat, rather then being coupled to the synthesis of ATP. Such uncoupling molecules are deliberately used by some organisms to generate heat. For example, uncoupling the protein thermogenin plays an important role in regulating the temperature of some mammals, especially newborn human infants, who lack the hair to keep warm, and hibernating animals. We will describe this process in more detail in Chapter 40. 7.7 Fermentation: ATP from Glucose, without O2 129Suppose the supply of oxygen to a respiring cell is cut off (an anaerobic condition), perhaps by drowning or by extreme exertion. The first consequence of an insufficient supply of O2 is that the cell cannot reoxidize cytochrome c, so all of that compound is soon in the reduced form. When this happens, QH2 cannot be oxidized back to Q, and soon all the Q is in the reduced form. So it goes, until the entire respiratory chain is reduced. Under these circumstances, no NAD+ and no FAD are generated from their reduced forms. Therefore, the oxidative steps in glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, and the citric acid cycle also stop. If the cell has no other way to obtain energy from its food, it will die. Under anaerobic conditions, many (but not all) cells can continue to carry out glycolysis and produce a limited amount of ATP by fermentation. This process occurs in the cytoplasm with glycolysis. Fermentation has two defining characteristics. First, it uses NADH + H+ formed by glycolysis to reduce pyruvate or one of its metabolites, and consequently NAD+ is regenerated. NAD+ is required for reaction 6 of glycolysis, so once the cell has replenished its supply in this way, it can carry more glucose through glycolysis. Second, fermentation enables glycolysis to produce a small but sustained amount of ATP. Only as much ATP is produced as can be obtained from substrate-level phosphorylation-not the much greater yield of ATP obtained bycellular respiration. When cells capable of fermentation become anaerobic, the rate of glycolysis speeds up tenfold or even more. Thus a substantial rate of ATP production is maintained, although efficiency in terms of ATP molecules per glucose molecule is greatly reduced as compared with aerobic respiration. Some organisms are confined to totally anaerobic environments and use only fermentation. Other organisms carry on fermentation even in the presence of oxygen. And several bacteria carry on cellular respiration-not fermentation-without using oxygen gas as an electron acceptor. Instead, to oxidize their cytochromes, these bacteria reduce nitrate ions (NO3-) to nitrite ions (NO2-). We'll put that observation into a broader context in Chapter 26.7.7.1 Some fermenting cells produce lactic acid and others produce alcohol 129Many different types of fermentation are carried out by different bacteria and eukaryotic body cells. These different fermentations are distinguished by the final product produced. For example, in lactic acid fermentation, pyruvate is reduced to lactate. Lactic acid fermentation takes place in many microorganisms as well as in our muscle cells. Unlike muscle cells, however, nerve cells (neurons) are incapable of fermentation because they lack the enzyme that reduces pyruvate to lactate. For this reason, without adequate oxygen, the human nervous system (including the brain) is rapidly destroyed; it is the first part of the body to die. Certain yeasts and some plant cells carry on a process called alcoholic fermentation under anaerobic conditions. This process requires two enzymes to metabolize pyruvate. First, carbon dioxide is removed from pyruvate, leaving the compound acetaldehyde. Second, the acetaldehyde is reduced by NADH + H+, producing NAD+ and ethyl alcohol (ethanol). The brewing industry relies on alcoholic fermentation to produce wine and beer. 7.8 Contrasting Energy Yields 130The total net energy yield from fermentation is two molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose oxidized. In contrast, the maximum yield that can be obtained from a molecule of glucose through glycolysis followed by complete aerobic respiration is much greater-about 36 molecules of ATP. Why is so much more ATP produced by aerobic respiration? Fermentation is an incomplete oxidation of glucose. Much more energy remains in the end products of fermentation, such as lactic acid and ethanol, than in CO2. In cellular respiration, carriers (mostly NAD+) are reduced in pyruvate oxidation and the citric acid cycle, then oxidized by the respiratory chain, with the accompanying production of ATP (three for each NADH + H+ and two for each FADH2) by the chemiosmotic mechanism. In an aerobic environment, an organism capable of this type of metabolism will be at an advantage (in terms of energy availability per glucose molecule) over one limited to fermentation. The total gross yield of ATP from one molecule of glucose taken through glycolysis and cellular respiration is 38. However, we may subtract two from that gross-for a net yield of 36 ATP-because in some animal cells the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to NADH, and a "toll" of one ATP must be paid for each NADH produced in glycolysis that is shuttled into the mitochondrial matrix.7.9 Metabolic Pathways 130Glycolysis and the respiratory pathways do not operate in isolation from the rest of metabolism. Rather, there is an interchange, with biochemical traffic flowing both into these pathways and out of them, to and from the synthesis and breakdown of amino acids, nucleotides, fatty acids, and so forth. Indeed, the energy-harvestingpathways can be thought of, in railway terms, as the "central switching yard," where carbon skeletons enter from other molecules that are broken down to release their energy (catabolism) and carbon skeletons leave to form the major macromolecular constituents of the cell (anabolism).7.9.1 Catabolism and anabolism involve interconversions using carbon skeletons 131A typical hamburger or vegiburger contains three major sources of carbon skeletons for the person who eats it: carbohydrates, mostly as starch (a polysaccharide); lipids, mostly as triglycerides (three fatty acids attached to glycerol); and proteins (polymers of amino acids). Three types of macromolecules can be used in catabolism or anabolism. Polysaccharides, lipids, and proteins can all be broken down to provide energy. Polysaccharides are hydrolyzed to glucose phosphate, an intermediate in glycolysis, and this molecule then passes through the rest of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle, where its energy is extracted in NADH and ATP. Lipids are converted to their substituents, glycerol and fatty acids. Glycerol is converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, an intermediate in glycolysis, and fatty acids to acetate and then acetyl CoA in the mitochondria. In both cases, further oxidation to CO2 and release of energy then occur. Proteins are hydrolyzed to their amino acid building blocks. The 20 amino acids feed into glycolysis or the citric acid cycle at different points. A specific example, in which an amino acid is converted to an intermediate in the citric acid cycle. Many of the pathways for catabolism can operate in reverse. That is, glycolytic and citric acid cycle intermediates, instead of being oxidized to form CO2, can be reduced and used to form glucose in a process called gluconeogenesis (which means "new formation of glucose"). Likewise, acetyl CoA can form fatty acids. The most common fatty acids have an even number of carbons: 14, 16, 18,and so forth. These molecules are formed by adding two-carbon acetyl CoA "units" one at a time until the appropriate chain length is reached. Amino acids can be formed by reversing reactions, and these amino acids can then be polymerized into proteins. Some intermediates of the citric acid cycle are used in the synthesis of various important cellular constituents. ?-Ketoglutarate is a starting point for purines and oxaloacetate for pyrimidines, both constituents of the nucleic acids DNA and RNA. Succinyl CoA is a starting point for chlorophyll synthesis. Acetyl CoA is a building block for various pigments, plant growth substances, rubber, and the steroid hormones of animals, among other functions.7.9.2 Catabolism and anabolism are integrated 132A carbon atom from a protein in your burger can end up in DNA or fat or CO2, among other fates. How does the cell "decide" which metabolic pathway to follow? With all of the possible interconversions, you might expect that the cellular concentrations of various biochemical molecules would vary widely. For example, the level of oxaloacetate in your cells might depend on what you eat (some food molecules form oxaloacetate) and whether oxaloacetate is used up (in the citric acid cycle or in forming the amino acid aspartate). Remarkably, the levels of these substances in what is called the "metabolic pool" are quite constant. The cell regulates the enzymes of catabolism and anabolism so as to maintain a balance. This metabolic homeostasis gets upset only in unusual circumstances. Let's look at one of them: undernutrition. Glucose is an excellent source of energy. Fats and proteins are also energy sources. Any one, or all three, can be used to provide the energy you need. In reality, things are not so simple. Proteins, for example, have essential roles in your body as enzymes and structural elements, and using them for energy might deprive you of a catalyst for a vital reaction. Polysaccharides and fats have no such catalytic roles. But polysaccharides, because they are somewhat polar, can bind a lot of water. Because they are nonpolar, fats do not bind as much water as polysaccharides. So, in water, fats weight less than polysaccharides. Also, fats are more reduced then carbohydrates (more C-H bonds as opposed to C-OH) and have more energy stored in their bonds. For these two reasons, fats are a better way for an organism to store energy than polysaccharides. It is not surprising that a typical person has about one day's worth of food energy stored as glycogen, a week's food energy as usable proteins in blood, and over a month's food energy stored in fats. What happens if a person does not eat enough food to produce sufficient ATP and NADH for anabolism and biological activities? This situation can be the result of a deliberate decision to lose weight, but for too many people, it is forced upon them because not enough food is available. In either case, the first energy stores in the body to be used are the glycogen stores in muscle and liver cells. This doesn't last long, and next come fats. The level of acetyl CoA rises as fatty acids are broken down. However, a problem remains: Because fatty acids cannot get from the blood to the brain, the brain can use only glucose as its energy source. With glucose stores already depleted, the body must convert something else to make glucose for the brain. This gluconeogenesis uses mostly amino acids, largely from the breakdown of proteins. So, without sufficient food intake, both proteins (for glucose) and fats (for energy) are used up. After several weeks of starvation, fat stores become depleted, and the only energy source left is proteins, some of which have already been degraded to supply the brain with glucose. At this point, essential proteins, such as antibodies used to fight off infections, get broken down, both for energy and for gluconeogenesis. The loss of these proteins can lead to severe illnesses. 7.10 Regulating Energy Pathways 132We have described the relationships between metabolic pathways and noted that they work together to provide homeostasis in the cell and organism. But how does the cell regulate these interconversions to maintain constant metabolic pools? Consider what happens to the starch in your burger bun. In the digestive system, starch is hydrolyzed to glucose, which enters the blood for distribution to the rest of the body. Before this happens, however, a "decision" must be made: Is there already enough glucose in the blood to supply the body's needs? If there is, the excess glucose is converted to stored glycogen in the liver. If not enough glucose is supplied by food, liver glycogen is broken down to supply it, or other molecules are used to make glucose by gluconeogenesis. The end result is that the level of glucose in the blood is remarkably constant. We will describe the details of how this happens in Part Six of this book. For now, it is important to realize that the interconversions of glucose involve many steps, each catalyzed by an enzyme, and it is here that the controls often reside.7.10.1 Allostery regulates metabolism 133Glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain are regulated by allosteric control of the enzymes involved. In metabolic pathways, as we saw in Chapter 6, a high concentration of the products of a later reaction can suppress the action of enzymes that catalyze an earlier reaction. On the other hand, an excess of the product of one branch of a synthetic chain can speed up reactions in another branch, diverting raw materials away from synthesis of the first product. These negative and positive feedback control mechanisms are used at many points in the energy-harvesting processes. The main control point in glycolysis is the enzyme phosphofructokinase. This enzyme is allosterically inhibited by ATP and activated by ADP or AMP. As long as fermentation proceeds, yielding a relatively small amount of ATP, phosphofructokinase operates at full efficiency. But when aerobic respiration begins producing ATP 18 times faster than fermenation does, the abundant ATP allosterically inhibits the enzyme, and the conversion of fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate declines, as does the rate of glucose utilization.The main control point in the citric acid cycle is the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase, which converts isocitrate to ?-ketoglutarate. ATP and NADH + H+ are feedback inhibitors of this reaction; ADP and NAD+ are activators. If too much ATP is accumulating, or if NADH + H+ is being produced faster than it can be used by the respiratory chain, the conversion of isocitrate is slowed, and the citric acid cycle is essentially shut down. A shutdown of the citric acid cycle would cause large amounts of isocitrate and citrate to accumulate, except that the conversion of acetyl CoA to citrate is also slowed by abundant ATP and NADH + H+. However, a certain excess of citrate does accumulate, and this excess acts as an additional negative feedback inhibitor to slow the fructose 6-phosphate reaction early in glycolysis. Consequently, if the citric acid cycle has been slowed down because of abundant ATP (and not because of a lack of oxygen), glycolysis is shut down as well. Both processes resume when the ATP level falls and they are needed again. Allosteric control keeps these processes in balance. Another control point involves a method for storing excess acetyl CoA. If too much ATP is being made and the citric acid cycle shuts down, the accumulation of citrate switches acetyl CoA to the synthesis of fatty acids for storage. This is one reason why people who eat too much accumulate fat. These fatty acids may be metabolized later to produce more acetyl CoA.7.10.2 Evolution has led to metabolic efficiency 133Allosteric control of the sort is one of the most impressive examples of the tight organization that can evolve through natural selection when efficient operation is favored in the competition among organisms for limited resources. Each of the feedback controls regulates a part or various parts of the energy-harvesting pathways and keeps them operating in harmony and balance. Not just the regulatory systems have evolved; the pathways themselves are the products of evolution. Of the energy- harvesting pathways present in cells today, glycolysis and fermentation are the most ancient. These pathways appeared when the planetary environment was strictly anaerobic and all life was prokaryotic. To this day, the enzymes of glycolysis and fermentation are located in the cytoplasm. Eventually some cells gained the capacity to perform photosynthesis, which added O2 to the atmosphere, rendering most environments aerobic. Evolution in the aerobic environment led to the appearance of pyruvate oxidation and the citric acid cycle. Elaboration of membranes, especially in eukaryotic cells, allowed the evolution of chemiosmotic mechanisms for coupling electron transport to ATP production, as in oxidative phosphorylation. There have also been evolutionary refinements within the pathways themselves. Eukaryotic cells, but not prokaryotic ones, have a cytoskeleton based on microtubules and actin microfilaments. With the appearance of a cytoskeleton, some glycolytic enzymes became attached to cytoskeletal components, which thus organized the enzymes into efficient associations that allow molecules to move from one enzyme in the pathway to the next. In eukaryotes, hexokinase, the first glycolytic enzyme, binds to the outer mitochondrial membrane, giving the enzyme immediate access to ATP produced within the mitochondria. In metabolism, as in all the rest of biology, evolution leads to adaptation. 8 Photosynthesis: Energy from the SunFor several decades, corn growers in the United States competed to see who could coax the highest yield of grain from their acreage. After rising rapidly in the first half of the twentieth century, yields continued to increase, albeit somewhat more slowly. But the trend was clearly up-until the last decade of the century. From 1990 on, crop yields per acre have leveled off for corn, rice, and wheat-three grainswhich together supply over half the human race with food.Although overall food production continues to rise as more land is put into production and the environment of the crops is more intensively manipulated with fertilizers and pesticides, the increase of the human population is wiping out any per capita gains. Per person food production has not improved much since 1960-80, the peak of the so-called "Green Revolution" in agriculture. This was a period when new genetic strains were combined with more intensive environmental management combined to more than double crop yields. To coax crop plants to grow more and produce more on the available land, scientists are now focusing on photosynthesis, the biochemical process by which plants turn sunlight into carbohydrates, sugars, and starch. Photosynthesis is the very basis of life on Earth. The basic transformation of photosynthesis-the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy-is a familiar example of the laws of thermodynamics. As the first law tells us, when the form of energy changes from sunlight to plant, no energy is lost. However, as the second law states, the conversion is relatively inefficient, with only about 4 percent of the incident solar energy ending up in chemical bonds. Moreover, the use of solar energy initially captured as ATP and reduced electron carriers to reduce carbon dioxide to sugars is also inefficient. How can these efficiencies be improved? An important first step is a thorough understanding of photosynthesis. The process of photosynthesis can be neatly broken down into two steps. The first step is the conversion of energy from light to chemical bonds in reduced electron carriers and ATP. In the second step, these two sources of chemical energy are used to drive the synthesis of carbohydrates from carbon dioxide. In this chapter, we will examine these two processes, and show how they are related to each other and to plant growth.8.1 Identifying Photosynthetic Reactants and ProductsBy the beginning of the nineteenth century, scientists understood the broad outlines of photosynthesis. It was known to use three principal ingredients-water, carbon dioxide (CO2), and light-and to produce not only carbohydrate but also oxygen gas (O2). Scientists had learned that ;The water for photosynthesis in land plants comes primarily from the soil and must travel from the roots to the leaves; Carbon dioxide is taken in, and water and O2 are released, through tiny openings in leaves, called stomata (singular stoma) 1);  Light is absolutely necessary for the production of oxygen and carbohydrate. By 1804, scientists could summarize photosynthesis as follows: Carbon dioxide + water + light energy + sugar + oxygen, which turns into an equation that is the reverse of the overall equation for cellular respiration given in Chapter 7: 6 CO2 + 6 H2O ??C6H12O6 + 6 O2. Although correct, these statements say nothing about the details of the process. What roles does light play? How do the carbons become linked? And does the oxygen gas come from the CO2 or from the H2O?Almost a century and a half passed before the source of the O2 released during photosynthesis was determined. Its identification was one of the first uses of an isotopic tracer in biological research. In these experiments, two groups of green plants were allowed to carry on photosynthesis. Plants in the first group were supplied with water containing the heavy-oxygen isotope 18O and with CO2 containing only the common oxygen isotope 16O; plants in the second group were supplied with CO2 labeled with 18O and water containing only 16O. When oxygen gas was collected from each group of plants and analyzed, it was found that O2 containing 18O was produced in abundance by the plants that had been given 18O-labeled water, but not by the plants given labeled CO2. These results showed that all the oxygen gas produced during photosynthesis comes from water 2). This discovery is reflected in a revised balanced equation: 6 CO2 + 12 H2O ? C6H12O6 + 6 O2 + 6 H2O. Water appears on both sides of the equation because water is both used as a reactant (the twelve molecules on the left) and released as a product (the six new ones on the right). In this revised equation, there are now sufficient water molecules to account for all the oxygen gas produced. The photosynthetic production of oxygen by green plants is an important source of atmospheric oxygen, which most organisms-including plants themselves-require in order to complete their respiratory chains and obtain the energy for life. 8.2 The Two Pathways of Photosynthesis: An OverviewThe overall photosynthetic reaction just described does not proceed in a single step. In fact, in all of chemistry, no such complex reaction is accomplished in a single step. Rather, a series of simpler steps is required. By the middle of the twentieth century, it was clear that photosynthesis consists of many reactions that can be divided into two pathways: The first pathway, called the light reactions, is driven by light energy. It produces ATP and a reduced electron carrier (NADPH + H+) ;The second pathway, called the Calvin-Benson cycle, does not use light directly. It uses ATP, NADPH + H+, and CO2 to produce sugar 3). In the first pathway of photosynthesis-the light reactions-light energy is captured by pigment molecules and used to produce ATP from ADP and Pi. The the light reactions are mediated by molecular assemblies called photosystems. These systems pass electrons from one molecule to another, and some of this electron flow is coupled to ATP synthesis. Because light is the ultimate energy source, the synthesis of ATP in this pathway is called photophosphorylation. The NADPH + H+ and ATP produced by the light reactions are used in the second pathway, the Calvin-Benson cycle, whose reactions trap CO2 and reduce the resulting acid to sugar. This pathway is also known as the photosynthetic carbon reduction cycle, or simply the dark reactions (because none of its reactions uses light directly). The reactions of both pathways proceed within the chloroplast, but they reside in different parts of that organelle. Both pathways stop in the dark because ATP synthesis and NADP+ reduction require light. The rate of each set of reactions depends on the rate of the other. They are linked by the exchange of ATP and ADP, and of NADP+ and NADPH. 8.3 Properties of Light and PigmentsLight is a source of both energy and information. In later chapters, we'll examine the many roles of light and pigments in the transmission of information. In this chapter, our focus is on light as a source of energy. However, before we can consider the reactions of photosynthesis that use light energy, we need to examine the physical nature of light: its properties and energy content, and how it interacts with molecules.8.3.1 Light comes in packets called photonsLight is a form of electromagnetic radiation. It comes in discrete packets called photons. Light also behaves as if it were propagated in waves. The wavelength of light is the distance from the peak of one wave to the peak of the next 4). Light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation-cosmic rays, gamma rays, X rays, ultraviolet radiation, infrared radiation, microwaves, and radio waves- can be classified according to their wavelengths. Visible light fits into this electromagnetic spectrum between ultraviolet and infrared radiation 5). Humans perceive light as having distinct colors. The colors relate to the wavelengths of the light. Most people can see electromagnetic radiation in the range of wavelengths from 400 to 700 nm. The wavelength at 400 nm marks the violet end of the visible spectrum; that at 700 nm, the red end. Wavelengths in the range from about 100 to 400 nm are ultraviolet radiation; those immediately above 700 nm are referred to as infrared. The speed of light in a vacuum is one of the universal constants of nature. In a vacuum, light travels at 3 _ 1010 centimeters per second (or 186,000 miles per second), a value symbolized as c. In air, glass, water, and other media, light travels slightly more slowly. Let's consider light as a long train of waves moving in a straight line and see what the train would look like to a stationary observer. Successive peaks of the waves pass the observer with a uniform frequency determined by the wavelength and the speed of light. The exact relationship is ( = c/(, where ( (the Greek letter nu) is the frequency; c is the speed of light; and ( (Greek lambda) is the wavelength. Often ( is expressed in hertz (Hz), c in centimeters per second (cm/s), and ( in nanometers (nm) (1 nm = 10-9 m or 10-7 cm). The amount of energy, E, contained in a single photon is directly proportional to its frequency. The constant of proportionality that describes this relationship, h, is named Planck's constant, after Max Planck, who first introduced the concept of the photon. With this information we can write the equation E = h?, where ? is the frequency in Hz. Substituting c/? for ? (from the equation above relating (, (, and c), we see that E = hc/?. Thus shorter wavelengths mean greater energies; that is, energy is inversely proportional to wavelength. A photon of red light of wavelength 660 nm has less energy than a photon of blue light of 430 nm; an ultraviolet photon of 284 nm is much more energetic than either of these. For a photon to be active in any light-driven biological process-such as photosynthesis-it must have enough energy to perform the work required. The brightness, or intensity, of light at a given point is the amount of energy falling on a defined area-such as 1 cm2-per second. Light intensity is usually expressed in energy units (such as calories) per square centimeter per second, but the intensity of pure light of a single wavelength may also be expressed in terms of photons per square centimeter per second.8.3.2 Absorption of a photon puts a pigment in an excited stateWhen a photon meets a molecule, one of three things happens: The photon may bounce off the molecule-it may be reflected; The photon may pass through the molecule-it may be transmitted. Neither of these outcomes causes any change in the molecule, and neither has any chemical consequences; The photon may be absorbed by the molecule. In this case, the photon disappears. Its energy, however, cannot disappear, because energy is neither created nor destroyed. When a molecule absorbs a photon, it acquires the energy of that photon. It is thereby raised from a ground state (lower energy) to an excited state (higher energy) 6a). The difference in energy between the excited state and the ground state is precisely equal to the energy of the absorbed photon. The increase in energy boosts one of the electrons in the molecule into an orbital farther from the nucleus; this electron is now held less firmly by the molecule 6b), with chemical consequences that we will discuss later in this chapter.All molecules absorb electromagnetic radiation. The specific wavelengths absorbed by a particular molecule are characteristic of that type of molecule. Molecules that absorb wavelengths in the visible region of the spectrum are called pigments. When a beam of white light (light containing visible light of all wavelengths) falls on a pigment, certain wavelengths of the light are absorbed. The remaining wavelengths, which are reflected or transmitted, make the pigment appear to us to be colored. For example, if a pigment absorbs both blue and red light-as chlorophyll does-what we see is the remaining light-primarily green.8.3.3 Light absorption and biological activity vary with wavelengthA given type of molecule can absorb radiant energy of only certain wavelengths. If we plot a compound's absorption of light as a function of the wavelengths of the light, the result is an absorption spectrum 7). Absorption spectra are good "fingerprints" of compounds; sometimes an absorption spectrum contains enough information to enable us to identify an unknown compound. Light can also be analyzed for the magnitude of its effect on a particular activity, such as photosynthesis. A plot of the effectiveness of light as a function of wavelength is called an action spectrum. Action spectrum for photosynthesis by Anacharis, a freshwater plant. All wavelengths of visible light are at least somewhat effective in causing photosynthesis, but the blue and orange-red wavelengths are the most effective. Action spectra are helpful in determining what pigment or pigments are being used in a particular photobiological process, such as photosynthesis. We should be able to find which pigment or pigments have absorption spectra that match the action spectrum of the process we are observing.8.3.4 Photosynthesis uses chlorophylls and accessory pigmentsCertain pigments are important in biological processes, and we will discuss them as they appear in this book. Here we discuss the pigments that play roles in photosynthesis. Of these, the most important ones are the chlorophylls. Chlorophylls occur universally in the plant kingdom, in photosynthetic protists, and in photosynthetic bacteria. A mutant individual that lacks chlorophyll is unable to perform photosynthesis and will starve to death. In  plants, two chlorophylls predominate: chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b. These two molecules differ only slightly in their molecular structure. Both have a complex ring structure similar to the heme group of hemoglobin. In the center of each chlorophyll ring is a magnesium atom, and at a peripheral location on the ring is attached a long hydrocarbon "tail" that can adhere the chlorophyll to the hydrophobic portion of the thylakoid membrane 9). Chlorophylls absorb blue and red wavelengths, which are near the two ends of the visible spectrum. Thus, if only chlorophyll pigments were active in photosynthesis, much of the visible spectrum would go unused. However, all photosynthetic organisms possess accessory pigments, which absorb photons intermediate in energy between the red and the blue wavelengths, then transfer a portion of that energy to the chlorophylls. Among these accessory pigments are carotenoids, such as ?-carotene, which absorb photons in the blue and blue-green wavelengths and appear deep yellow. The phycobilins (phycocyanin and phycoerythrin), which are found in red algae and in cyanobacteria (contributing to their respective colors), absorb various yellow-green, yellow, and orange wavelengths. Such accessory pigments, in collaboration with the chlorophylls, constitute an energy-absorbing antenna system covering much of the visible spectrum.8.4 Light Reactions: Light AbsorptionA pigment molecule enters an excited state when it absorbs a photon. The excited state is an unstable potential energy state, and the molecule usually does not stay in it very long. One of two things happens: The molecule returns to the ground state, emitting much of the absorbed energy as fluorescence; The molecule passes some of the absorbed energy to another pigment molecule. In fluorescence, the boosted electron falls back from its higher orbital to its original, lower one 10). This process is accompanied by a loss of energy, which is given off as another photon. The energy of this photon, however, is somewhat less than the energy the pigment absorbed (recall the second law of thermodynamics), and so the emitted photon has a longer wavelength than the absorbed one. In any case, there can be no chemical changes or biological consequences-no chemical work is done. However, rather than emiting the photon's energy as fluoresence, the pigment molecules may pass the absorbed energy along. The pigments in photosynthetic organisms are arranged into energy-absorbing antenna systems. In these systems, the molecules are held by a complex of proteins in the right orientation for light absorption. Any pigment molecule with a suitable absorption spectrum can absorb an incoming photon and become excited. The excitation passes from one pigment molecule in the antenna to another, moving from pigments that absorb shorter wavelengths (higher energies) to pigments that absorb longer wavelengths (lower energies) of light. Thus, the excitation ends up in the one pigment molecule in the antenna that absorbs the longest wavelength; this molecule occupies the reaction center of the antenna 11). The reaction center is the part of the antenna that converts the light absorbed into chemical energy. In plants, the pigment molecule in the reaction center is always a molecule of chlorophyll a. There are many other chlorophyll a molecules in the antenna, but all of them absorb light at shorter wavelengths than does the molecule in the reaction center.8.4.1 Excited chlorophyll acts as a reducing agentThe light energy absorbed by the antenna system is transferred from one pigment molecule to another as an electron. When this happens, the second molecule is reduced by the first. Recall that reduction is the addition of electrons and oxidation is their removal. Ultimately, however, photosynthesis conserves energy by using the excited chlorophyll molecule in the reaction center as a reducing agent 11). Ground-state chlorophyll (symbolized as Chl) is not much of a reducing agent, but excited chlorophyll (Chl*) is a good one. To understand the reducing capability of Chl*, recall that in an excited molecule, one of the electrons is zipping about in an orbital farther away from its nucleus. Less tightly held, this electron can be passed on in a redox reaction to an oxidizing agent. Thus Chl* (but not Chl) can react with an oxidizing agent A in a reaction like this: Chl* + A ? Chl+ + A-. This, then, is the first biochemical consequence of light absorption by chlorophyll: The chlorophyll becomes a reducing agent and participates in a redox reaction that would not have occurred in the dark. As we are about to see, the further adventures of the electrons from chlorophyll reduce NADP+ and generate a proton-motive force that is eventually used to synthesize ATP. 8.5 Electron Flow, Photophosphorylation and ReductionsThe high energy stored in the electrons of excited chlorophyll can be transferred to suitably oxidized nonpigment acceptor molecules. When these molecules are reduced, they can in turn reduce other molecules, setting up an electron flow. Electrons can flow through a series of carriers where the reduced form of one has less energy than the reduced form of the next; this system is similar to electron transport in the mitochondria (Chapter 7), and releases the energy that is captured by the chemiosmotic synthesis of ATP in a process called photophosphorylation. ATP is used in the dark reactions as a source of energy for the endergonic synthesis of carbohydrate. A second energy-rich product of the light reactions that is used in the dark reactions is a reduced coenzyme, NADPH + H+. Just as NAD+ couples the pathways of cellular respiration, a similar compound, NADP+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) couples the photosynthetic pathways. NADP+ is identical to NAD, except that the latter has another phosphate group attached to the ribose. Whereas NAD participates in catabolism, NADP is used in synthetic reactions (anabolism), such as carbohydrate synthesis from CO2, that require energy through reducing power. There are two different systems of electron flow in photosynthesis: Noncyclic electron flow produces NADPH + H+ and ATP; Cyclic electron flow produces only ATP. We'll consider these noncyclic and cyclic reactions before considering the role of chemiosmosis in phosphorylation-a process that is very similar to that discovered for oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria.8.5.1 Noncyclic electron flow produces ATP and NADPHIn noncyclic electron flow, light energy is used to oxidize water, forming O2, H+, and electrons. Electrons from water replenish the electrons that chlorophyll molecules lose when they are excited by light. As the electrons are passed from water to chlorophyll, and ultimately to NADP+, they pass through a series of electron carriers. These redox reactions are exergonic, and some of the free energy released is used ultimately to form ATP by a chemiosmotic mechanism. Noncyclic electron flow requires the participation of two distinct molecules of chlorophyll. These molecules are associated with two different photosystems, each of which consists of many chlorophyll molecules and accessory pigments in separate energy-absorbing antennas 12): Photosystem I uses light energy to reduce NADP+ to NADPH + H+; Photosystem II uses light energy to oxidize water molecules, producing electrons, protons (H+), and O2. The reaction center for photosystem I contains a chlorophyll a molecule in a form called P700 because it can best absorb light of wavelength 700 nm. The reaction center for photosystem II contains a chlorophyll a molecule in a form called P680 because it absorbs light maximally at 680 nm. Thus photosystem II requires photons that are somewhat more energetic (i.e., lower wavelengths) than those required by photosystem I. To keep noncyclic electron flow going, both photosystems I and II must constantly be absorbing light, thereby boosting electrons to higher orbitals from which they may be captured by specific oxidizing agents. The reactions of noncyclic electron flow from water to NADP+. Photosystem II  absorbs photons, sending electrons from P680 to pheophytin-I-the first carrier in the redox chain-and causing P680 to become oxidized to P680+. Electrons from the oxidation of water are passed to P680+, reducing it once again to P680, which can absorb more photons. The electron from photosystem II passes through a series of exergonic reactions in the redox chain, which are coupled to proton pumping. This pumping creates a proton gradient that stores energy for ATP synthesis. In photosystem I, P700 absorbs photons, becoming excited to P700*, which then leads to the reduction of an oxidizing agent, ferredoxin (Fd), while being oxidized to P700+. Then P700+ returns to the ground state by accepting electrons passed through the redox chain from photosystem II. Now electron flow in photosystem II is accounted for, and we must consider only the electrons from photosystem I. These electrons are used in the last step of noncyclic electron flow, in which two electrons and two protons are used to reduce a molecule of NADP+ to NADPH + H+. In sum, noncyclic electron flow uses a molecule of water, four photons (two each absorbed by photosystems I and II), one molecule each of NADP+ and ADP, and one Pi. From these ingredients it produces one molecule each of NADPH + H+ and ATP, and half a molecule of oxygen (1/2 O2). A substantial fraction of the light energy absorbed in noncyclic electron flow is lost as heat, but another significant fraction is trapped in ATP and NADPH + H+.8.5.2 Cyclic electron flow produces ATP but no NADPHNoncyclic electron flow produces equal quantities of ATP and NADPH + H+. However, as we will see, the Calvin-Benson cycle uses more ATP than NADPH + H+. In order to keep things in balance, plants sometimes make use of a supplementary form of photophosphorylation that does not generate NADPH + H+. Electron flow that produces only ATP is called cyclic because an electron passed from an excited chlorophyll molecule at the outset cycles back to the same chlorophyll molecule at the end of the chain of reactions 13). Water, which supplies electrons to restore chlorophyll molecules to the ground state in noncyclic electron flow, does not enter these reactions; thus they produce no O2. Before cyclic flow begins, P700, the reaction center chlorophyll of photosystem I, is in the ground state. It absorbs a photon and becomes P700*. The P700* then reacts with oxidized ferredoxin (Fdox) to produce reduced ferredoxin (Fdred). The reaction is exergonic, releasing free energy.In noncyclic electron flow, Fdred reduces NADP+ to form NADPH + H+. However, Fdred can also pass its added electron to a different oxidizing agent, plastoquinone (PQ, a small organic molecule). This is what happens in cyclic flow, which occurs in some organisms when the ratio of NADPH + H+ to NADP+ in the chloroplast is high. Thus, Fdred reduces PQ, and PQred passes the electron to a cytochrome complex (Cyt). The electron continues down the redox chain until it completes its cycle by returning to P700. This cycle is a series of redox reactions, each exergonic, and the released energy is stored in a form that ultimately can be used to produce ATP. When P700* passed its electron on to Fd, it became positively charged P700+. In due course, P700+ interacts with the last reducing agent in the redox chain, plastocyanin (PC), which donates an electron to P700+, resulting in a restoration of its uncharged form. By the time the electron from P700* travels through the redox chain and comes back to reduce P700+, all the energy from the original photon has been released. In each of the redox reactions, some free energy is used to form ATP and some free energy is lost as heat.8.5.3 Chemiosmosis is the source of ATP in photophosphorylationHow does electron transport in photosystems I and II form ATP? In Chapter 7 we considered the chemiosmotic mechanism for ATP formation in the mitochondrion. The chemiosmotic mechanism also operates in photophosphorylation. In chloroplasts, as in mitochondria, electrons move through a series of redox reactions, releasing energy, which is used to transport protons (H+) across a membrane. This active proton transport results in a proton-motive force-a difference in pH and in electric charge across the membrane. In the mitochondrion, protons are pumped out of the matrix, across the internal membrane, and into the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes. Similarly, in the chloroplast, the electron carriers in the thylakoid membranes  are oriented so that protons move into the interior of the thylakoid, and the inside becomes acidic with respect to the outside. The ratio of H+ insideversus outside a thylakoid is usually 10,000:1, which is a difference of 4 pH units. This difference in pH leads to the diffusion of H+ back out of the thylakoid through specific protein channels in the membrane. These channels are enzymes-ATP synthases-that couple the formation of ATP to the diffusion of protons back across the membrane, just as in mitochondria 14).8.5.4 Photosynthetic pathways are the products of evolutionThe first photosynthetic organisms were probably anaerobic bacteria that used hydrogen sulfide, rather than water, as a source of electrons: CO2 + 2 H2S ? (CH2O) + 2 S + H2O. Many bacteria still use this system, which releases sulfur rather than oxygen. Nearly 3 billion years ago, the evolution of new pigments in certain bacteria allowed them to extract electrons from water and use them to reduce NADP+ while producing O2 as a by-product. At this time, the atmosphere of Earth contained little O2. Over hundreds of millions of years, these cyanobacteria poured enough oxygen gas into the atmosphere to make possible the evolution of cellular respiration. These new photosynthetic reactions forever changed the Earth and the course of evolution, making possible a great diversification of life. Furthermore, if a larger cell engulfed one of these cyanobacteria, that cell could perform photosynthesis. This was probably the first event in the evolution of eukaryotic, photosynthetic plant cells. 8.6 Making Sugar from CO2: The Calvin-Benson Cycle The second main pathway of photosynthesis is the Calvin-Benson cycle.The reactions of this pathway incorporate CO2 into sugars. Most of the enzymes that catalyze the reactions of this pathway are dissolved in the chloroplast stroma (the "soup" outside the thylakoids), and this is where the reactions take place. These reactions are sometimes called the "dark reactions" because they do not directly require light energy. However, they use the energy in ATP and NADPH, produced in the thylakoids during the light reactions, to reduce CO2 to carbohydrate. So these reactions require light indirectly, and they take place only in the light.8.6.1 Isotope labeling experiments reveal the steps of Calvin-Benson cycleTo identify the sequence of reactions by which CO2 ends up in carbohydrate, it was necessary to label CO2 so that it could be followed after presentation to a plant cell. In the 1950s, Melvin Calvin, Andrew Benson, and their colleagues used radioactively labeled CO2 in which some of the carbon atoms were not the normal 12C, but its radioisotope 14C. Although 14C is distinguished by its emission of radiation, chemically it behaves virtually identically to nonradioactive 12C. In general, enzymes do not distinguish between isotopes of an element in their substrates, so 14CO2 is treated the same way by photosynthesizing cells as 12CO2. Calvin and his colleagues exposed cultures of the unicellular green alga Chlorella to 14CO2 for 30 seconds. They killed the cells, extracted their carbohydrates, and separated the different compounds from one another by paper chromatography. Many compounds, including monosaccharides and amino acids, contained 14C 15). However, if they stopped the exposure after just 3 seconds, only one compound was labeled-a three-carbon sugar phosphate called 3-phosphoglycerate (3PG). By tracing the steps in this manner, they soon discovered a cycle, similar to the citric acid cycle, that "fixes" CO2 in a larger molecule, produces carbohydrate, and regenerates the initial CO2 acceptor. This cycle was appropriately named the Calvin-Benson cycle. The initial reaction in the Calvin-Benson cycle fixes the one-carbon CO2 in a five-carbon compound, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP). An intermediate six-carbon compound forms, which quickly breaks down, forming two three-carbon molecules of 3PG, which is what Calvin and colleagues had seen 16). The enzyme that catalyzes the fixation reaction, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco), is the most abundant protein in the world, comprising about 20 percent of all the protein in every plant leaf.8.6.2 The Calvin-Benson cycle is composed of three processesThe Calvin-Benson cycle uses the high-energy compounds made in the thylakoids during the light reactions (ATP, NADPH) to reduce CO2 to carbohydrate. There are three processes that make up the cycle 17): Fixation of CO2. As we saw, this reaction is catalyzed by rubisco, and its product is 3PG; Conversion of fixed CO2 into carbohydrate (G3P). This series of reactions involves a phosphorylation (using the ATP made in the light reactions) and a reduction (using the NADPH made in the light reactions); Regeneration of the CO2 acceptor, RuBP. Most of the 3PG ends up as RuMP (ribulose monophosphate), and ATP is used to convert this to RuBP. So for every "turn" of the cycle, with one CO2 fixed, the acceptor gets regenerated. The end product of this cycle is glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P), which is a three-carbon sugar phosphate, also called triose phosphate: There are two fates for the G3P that ends up as a product of the Calvin-Benson cycle. In a typical leaf, about a third of it ends up in the polysaccharide starch, which is stored in the chloroplast and serves as a source of glucose. Two-thirds of the G3P product is converted to the disaccharide sucrose, which is transported out of the leaf to other organs in the plant, where it is hydrolyzed to its constituent monosaccharides: glucose and fructose. The glucose produced in photosynthesis is subsequently used by the plant to make other compounds besides sugars. The carbon of glucose is incorporated into amino acids, lipids, and the building blocks of the nucleic acids. The products of the Calvin-Benson cycle are of crucial importance to the entire biosphere, for the covalent bonds of these products represent the total energy yield from the harvesting of light by plants. Most of this stored energy is released by glycolysis and cellular respiration during plant growth, development, and reproduction. However, much plant matter ends up being consumed by animals. Glycolysis and cellular respiration in the animals releases free energy from the plant matter for use in the animal cells. 8.7 Photorespiration and Its Evolutionary ConsequencesThe enzyme rubisco is the most abundant protein in the biosphere. Its properties are remarkably identical in all photosynthetic organisms, from bacteria to flowering plants. However, some properties of this enzyme severely limit its effectiveness. In the discussion that follows, we will identify and explore some of these limitations and see how evolution has constructed bypasses around them. First we'll look at photorespiration, a process in which rubisco fixes O2 instead of CO2, lowering the overall rate of CO2 fixation and plant growth. Then we'll examine some biochemical pathways and features of plant anatomy that compensate for the limitations of rubisco.8.7.1 RuBP reacts with O2 in photorespirationAs its full name indicates, rubisco is a carboxylase (adding CO2 to an acceptor molecule, RuBP) as well as an oxygenase (adding O2 to RuBP). These two reactions compete with each other.When RuBP and O2 react, one of the products is a two-carbon compound, glycolyate: RuBP + O2 ? glycolyate. The glycolyate diffuses into membrane-enclosed organelles called peroxisomes 19). There, a series of reactions converts it to the amino acid glycine: glycolate ? ? glycine. The glycine then diffuses into a mitochondrion, where two glycine molecules are converted to another amino acid, serine: 2 glycine ? serine + CO2. This pathway, called photorespiration, uses ATP and NADPH produced in the light reactions, just like the Calvin-Benson cycle. But the net effect of photorespiration essentially undoes what the Calvin-Benson cycle accomplishes: CO2 is released instead of being fixed into carbohydrate. In many plants, photorespiraton reduces the amount of carbon fixed into carbohydrate by 25 percent. How does rubisco "decide" whether to act as an oxygenase or a carboxylase? The prime consideration is the relative concentrations of CO2 and O2 in the leaf. If O2 is relatively abundant, rubisco acts as an oxygenase, and photorespiration ensues. If CO2 predominates, rubisco fixes it, and the Calvin-Benson cycle occurs. The level of O2 in a leaf becomes especially high on a hot, dry day. To prevent water loss, the stomata that allow water to evaporate from the leaf close. But this also prevents gases from entering and leaving the leaf. So, the CO2 concentration falls because it is being used up by the light-driven photosynthetic reactions, and the O2 concentration rises because of these same reactions. If photorespiration is wasteful of the photosynthetic process, why does it exist? Apparently, it is not essential for life. Many plants get along without it, and even plants with it can grow well if it is inhibited chemically. One explanation is that the active site of rubisco evolved to bind both CO2 and O2. This was not a problem originally, as there was little O2 in the atmosphere, and the CO2 binding activity was the only one used. When O2 appeared, so did the photorespiration pathway.8.7.2 Some plants have evolved systems to bypass photorespirationA solution to the problem of photorespiration has evolved in a number of plants, most of them related to tropical species such as sugarcane. The objective is to raise the level of CO2 in relation to O2 around rubisco, so that carboxylation is favored. This is not an easy task, since the air surrounding a leaf is 21 percent O2 and only 0.036 percent CO2. In the leaves of plants such as roses, wheat, and rice, the mesophyll cells just below the surface are full of chloroplasts that contain abundant rubisco 20a). On a hot day, these leaves close their stomata to conserve water. The level of CO2 in the air spaces of the leaves falls, and that of O2 rises, as photosynthesis goes on. Because the first product of CO2 fixation in these plants is the three-carbon molecule 3PG, they are called C3 plants. As we have seen, photorespiration occurs under these conditions. In corn, sugarcane, and other tropical grasses, the chloroplasts, with their abundant rubisco, are in a cell layer in the interior of the leaf 20b). Like C3 plants, these plants close their stomata on a hot day, but their rate of photosynthesis does not fall, nor does photorespiration occur. They have a way to keep the ratio of CO2 to O2 around rubisco high, so that rubisco acts as a carboxylase. They do this in part by having a four-carbon compound as the first product of CO2 fixation, and so are called C4 plants. C4 plants perform the normal Calvin-Benson cycle, but they have an additional early reaction that fixes CO2 without losing carbon to photorespiration, greatly increasing the overall photosynthetic yield. Because this initial CO2 fixation step can function even at low levels of CO2 and high temperatures, C4 plants very effectively optimize photosynthesis under conditions that inhibit the photosynthesis of C3 plants. C4 plants have two separate enzymes for CO2 fixation in different chloroplasts in two different locations in the leaf 21). One, present in the mesophyll cells near the surface of the leaf, fixes CO2 to a three-carbon acceptor compound (phosphoenol pyruvate) to produce the four-carbon fixation product (oxaloacetate). This enzyme, PEP carboxylase, has two advantages over rubisco: It does not have oxygenase activity; It fixes CO2 at very low levels. So even on a hot day when the stomata are closed, CO2 is low, and O2 is high, PEP carboxylase just keeps on fixing CO2. The four-carbon compound diffuses out of the mesophyll cells and into the bundle sheath cells in the interior of the leaf. The chloroplasts in these cells contain abundant rubisco. There, the four-carbon compound is decarboxylated, losing CO2 and regenerating the three-carbon acceptor, which diffuses back out to the mesophyll cells. The role of this acceptor is to bind CO2 from the air in the leaf and carry it to the interior cells, where it is "dropped off" at rubisco. This process essentially pumps up the CO2 concentration around rubisco, so that it acts as a carboxylase and begins the Calvin-Benson cycle. Kentucky bluegrass, a C3 plant, thrives on lawns in April and May. But in the heat of the summer, it does not do as well, and crabgrass, a C4 plant, takes over the lawn. The same is true on a global scale for crops: C3 plants, such as soybeans, rice, wheat, and barley, have been adapted for human food production in temperate climates, while C4 plants, such as corn and sugarcane, originated and are grown in the tropics. Table 8.1 compares C3 and C4 photosynthesis. C3 plants are certainly more ancient than C4 plants. While C3 photosynthesis appears to have begun about 3.5 billion years ago, C4 plants appeared about 12 million years ago. A possible factor in the emergence of the C4 pathway is the decline in atmospheric CO2. When dinosaurs ruled the Earth 100 million years ago, the concentration of CO2 was four times what it is now. As CO2 levels then declined, the more efficient C4 plants would have had an advantage over their C3 counterparts.8.7.3 CAM plants also use PEP carboxylaseOther plants besides the C4 species use PEP carboxylase to fix and accumulate CO2 while their stomata are closed. Such plants include some water-storing plants, called succulents, of the family Crassulaceae, many cacti, pineapples, and several other kinds of flowering plants. These plants conserve water by keeping their stomata closed during the daylight hours, thus minimizing water loss by evaporation. How, then, can they perform photosynthesis? Their trick is to open their stomata at night and store CO2 by a different mechanism. The CO2 metabolism of these plants is called crassulacean acid metabolism, or CAM, after the family succulents in which it was discovered. CAM is much like the metabolism of C4 plants in that CO2 is initially fixed into four-carbon compounds. In CAM plants, however, the processes of initial CO2 fixation and the Calvin-Benson cycle are separated in time rather than in space 22). And CAM plants lack the specialized cell relationships of C4 plants. In CAM plants, CO2 is fixed initially in mesophyll cells to form the four-carbon compound oxaloacetate, which is converted to malic acid. This fixation occurs during the night, when less water is lost through open stomata. When daylight arrives, the accumulated malic acid is shipped to the chloroplasts, where decarboxylation supplies the CO2 for operation of the Calvin-Benson cycle, and the light reactions supply the necessary ATP and NADPH + H+.8.8 Metabolic Pathways in PlantsGreen plants are autotrophs, and can synthesize all the molecules they need from three simple starting materials: CO2, H2O, and NH4. The latter is needed for amino acids, and comes either from the conversion of nitrogen-containing molecules taken up in soil water by the roots or from the bacterial conversion of N2 gas. Although the light reactions of photosynthesis generate some ATP and NADPH, the products are used for the Calvin-Benson cycle and are far less than plant cells need to fuel their endergonic reactions. Also, not all plant cells are photosynthetic. To satisfy their need for ATP, plants, like all other organisms, carry out respiration. Both aerobic respiration and fermentation can occur in plants, although the former is far more common. Plant cellular respiration, unlike photosynthesis, takes place both in the light and in the dark. Because glycolysis occurs in the cytosol, respiration in the mitochondria, and photosynthesis in the chloroplasts, all these processes can proceed simultaneously. Photosynthesis and respiration are closely linked through the Calvin-Benson cycle 23). Two linkages are particularly important: 3PG  from the Calvin-Benson cycle can be converted to pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis; G3P  from the Calvin-Benson cycle can be converted to hexose phosphates (such as glucose 1-phosphate), which can enter glycolysis. In both cases, the result is the catabolic breakdown of Calvin-Benson cycle products to CO2, with the associated synthesis of ATP. Once the carbon skeletons from the Calvin-Benson cycle enter the "central switching yard" of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle, they can be used anabolically to make lipids, proteins, and other carbohydrates. Energy flows from sunlight to reduced carbon in photosynthesis to ATP in respiration. Energy can also be stored in the bonds of macromolecules such as polysaccharides, lipids, and proteins. For a plant to grow, energy storage (as body structures) must exceed energy release; that is, overall photosynthesis to fixed carbon must exceed respiration. This is the aim of the farmers growing corn whom we described in the opening of this chapter. And it is the basis of the ecological food chain, as we will see in later chapters.Chapter SummaryLife on Earth depends on the absorption of light energy from the sun; In plants, photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts. Photosynthesizing plants take in CO2, water, and light energy, producing O2 and carbohydrate. The overall reaction is 6 CO2 + 12 H2O + light ? C6H12O6 + 6 O2 + 6 H2O. The oxygen atoms in O2 come from water, not from CO2. In the light reactions of photosynthesis, electron flow and photophosphorylation produce ATP and reduce NADP+ to NADPH + H+. ATP and NADPH + H+ are needed for the reactions that fix and reduce CO2 in the Calvin-Benson cycle, forming sugars. Light energy comes in packets called photons, but it also has wavelike properties; Pigments absorb light in the visible spectrum; Absorption of a photon puts a pigment molecule in an excited state that has more energy than its ground state. Each compound has a characteristic absorption spectrum. An action spectrum reveals the biological effectiveness of different wavelengths of light; Chlorophylls and accessory pigments form antenna systems for absorption of light energy; An excited pigment molecule may lose its energy by fluorescence, or by transferring it to another pigment molecule; Noncyclic electron flow uses two photosystems (I and II), producing ATP, NADPH + H+, and O2. Photosystem II uses P680 chlorophyll, from which light-excited electrons are passed to a redox chain that drives chemiosmotic ATP production. Light-driven oxidation of water releases O2 and passes electrons from water to the P680 chlorophyll. Photosystem I passes electrons from P700 chlorophyll to another redox chain and then to NADP+, forming NADPH + H+. Cyclic electron flow uses P700 chlorophyll and produces only ATP. Its operation maintains the proper balance of ATP and NADPH + H+ in the chloroplast; Chemiosmosis is the source of ATP in photophosphorylation. Electron transport pumps protons from the stroma into the thylakoids, establishing a proton-motive force. Diffusion of the protons back to the stroma via ATP synthase channels drives ATP formation from ADP and Pi; Photosynthesis probably originated in anaerobic bacteria that used H2S as a source of electrons instead of H2O. Oxygen production by bacteria was an important event in the evolution of eukaryotes.The Calvin-Benson cycle makes sugar from CO2. This pathway was elucidated through the use of radioactive tracers; The Calvin-Benson cycle consists of three phases: fixation of CO2, reduction and carbohydrate production, and regeneration of RuBP. RuBP is the initial CO2 acceptor, and 3PG is the first stable product of CO2 fixation. The enzyme rubisco catalyzes the reaction of CO2 and RuBP to form 3PG; The enzyme rubisco can catalyze a reaction between O2 and RuBP in addition to the reaction between CO2 and RuBP. This consumption of O2 is called photorespiration and significantly reduces the efficiency of photosynthesis. The reactions that constitute photorespiration are distributed over three organelles: chloroplasts, peroxisomes, and mitochondria; At high temperatures and low CO2 concentrations, the oxygenase function of rubisco is favored; C4 plants bypass photorespiration with special chemical reactions and specialized leaf anatomy. In C4 plants, PEP carboxylase in mesophyll chloroplasts initially fixes CO2 in four-carbon acids, which then diffuse into bundle sheath cells, where their decarboxylation produces locally high concentrations of CO2; CAM plants operate much like C4 plants, but their initial CO2 fixation by PEP carboxylase is temporally separated from the Calvin-Benson cycle, rather than spatially separated as in C4 plants; Plants respire both in the light and in the dark, but photosynthesize only in the light. To survive, a plant must photosynthesize more than it respires, giving it a net gain of reduced energy-rich compounds; Photosynthesis and respiration are linked through the Calvin-Benson cycle, the citric acid cycle, and glycolysis.